Follower, or subject of someone
Form a pompadour or bun
Now, fellow Israelites, I know that you acted in ignorance, as did your leaders.
While they were trying to kill him, news reached the commander of the Roman troops that the whole city of Jerusalem was in an uproar.
in truthful speech and in the power of God; with weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left;
Seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, were doing this.
What harmony is there between Christ and Belial? Or what does a believer have in common with an unbeliever?
He is like a slave/servant of God.
Friendship name (shared by close friends)
To be wild, out of control
Later Jesus found him at the temple and said to him, “See, you are well again. Stop sinning or something worse may happen to you.”
tight fit
For all the nations have drunk the maddening wine of her adulteries. The kings of the earth committed adultery with her, and the merchants of the earth grew rich from her excessive luxuries.”
smart
For if the message spoken by angels was binding, and every violation and disobedience received its just punishment,
A black bead
will fail to receive many times as much in this age, and in the age to come eternal life.”
Then they cast lots, and the lot fell to Matthias; so he was added to the eleven apostles.
As for that [kind of] dizziness, we are the ones who go around, and if we experience vertigo, what goes around is that which we are looking at.
To be reconciled to one another
Five days later the high priest Ananias went down to Caesarea with some of the elders and a lawyer named Tertullus, and they brought their charges against Paul before the governor.
A shelter will be built on the raft.
For the word of God is alive and active. Sharper than any double-edged sword, it penetrates even to dividing soul and spirit, joints and marrow; it judges the thoughts and attitudes of the heart.
"By what authority are you doing these things?" they asked. "And who gave you authority to do this?"
You’d be slashed into pieces if you were near me.
You spoke by the Holy Spirit through the mouth of your servant, our father David: ‘Why do the nations rage and the peoples plot in vain?
Water skippers that glide over the surface of backwaters or still pools.
kind of weed that emits an irritating gas
kind of decorated spear
What we sew won’t run out well.
"Father, if you are willing, take this cup from me; yet not my will, but yours be done."
go off in a different direction [
Immediately the leprosy left him and he was cured.
Above all, my brothers, do not swear-- not by heaven or by earth or by anything else. Let your "Yes" be yes, and your "No," no, or you will be condemned.
The person who dries rice in the sun frequently stirs and spreads it around.
cargoes of cinnamon and spice, of incense, myrrh and frankincense, of wine and olive oil, of fine flour and wheat; cattle and sheep; horses and carriages; and human beings sold as slaves.
be finicky about something
the word aku, is not the same as atu. The meaning sense is different.
There is no one to whom he shows favoritism; [he treats] everyone equally. There is no one whom he belittles.
The whole Judean countryside and all the people of Jerusalem went out to him. Confessing their sins, they were baptized by him in the Jordan River.
Peter said, “Explain the parable to us.”
“You have heard that it was said to the people long ago, ‘You shall not murder, and anyone who murders will be subject to judgment.’
Estimate the length.
To leave water; climb up on bank from the river
To rise as river during flood stage, or the tide of the ocean
The
kind of bamboo
because of the tender mercy of our God, by which the rising sun will come to us from heaven  to shine on those living in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the path of peace.”
It was kept a secret from us.
Japanese type beetle

that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures,
Salt
The phosphorescent leaf, that is what we use to light up our pathway.
winnowing tray
The person who is purchasing an axe, he will be slow in looking because the one that is best , [that is the one] he will buy.
"Where have you laid him?" he asked. "Come and see, Lord," they replied.
It is written: 'And he was numbered with the transgressors' ; and I tell you that this must be fulfilled in me. Yes, what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment."
Nervously move one's foot
obtain
For if the willingness is there, the gift is acceptable according to what one has, not according to what one does not have.
From him the whole body, joined and held together by every supporting ligament, grows and builds itself up in love, as each part does its work.
Sty in the eye
Then a voice came from heaven, "I have glorified it, and will glorify it again." The crowd that was there and heard it said it had thundered; others said an angel had spoken to him.
We have chills when we are ill.
I in them and you in me. May they be brought to complete unity to let the world know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me.
recognize because of being able to see someone clearly
small basket with a lid, made of rattan
John answered them all, “I baptize you with water. But one who is more powerful than I will come, the straps of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.
waterhole
And they cannot prove to you the charges they are now making against me.
Joseph, a Levite from Cyprus, whom the apostles called Barnabas (which means “son of encouragement”),
To lick with the tongue
Another time he went into the synagogue, and a man with a shriveled hand was there.
But when you pray, go into your room, close the door and pray to your Father, who is unseen. Then your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.
Bite off [the tails] of the shrimps.
woven bracelet
enclose
talkative
They put a purple robe on him, then twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on him.
Early in the morning, Jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples did not realize that it was Jesus.
Truly I tell you, whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.
make something deep
The servant fell on his knees before him. ‘Be patient with me,’ he begged, ‘and I will pay back everything.’
consent to marriage
Hip
They arranged to meet Paul on a certain day, and came in even larger numbers to the place where he was staying. From morning till evening he explained and declared to them the kingdom of God and tried to convince them about Jesus from the Law of Moses and from the Prophets.
The owner can no longer eat; so it’s abandoned.
The demons begged Jesus, "Send us among the pigs; allow us to go into them."
“You judge by human standards; I pass judgment on no one.”
We were surprised at Amutatoy, that he came visiting at midnight.
The person is making a cap for his house so that it won't rain in.
His feet were like bronze glowing in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of rushing waters.
Did I exploit you through any of the men I sent to you?
The crowd listened to Paul until he said this. Then they raised their voices and shouted, "Rid the earth of him! He's not fit to live!"
Anything invaded by weevils
Brothers, if I am still preaching circumcision, why am I still being persecuted? In that case the offense of the cross has been abolished.
A voice came from the cloud, saying, “This is my Son, whom I have chosen; listen to him.”
Pig’s house.
Was a man already circumcised when he was called? He should not become uncircumcised. Was a man uncircumcised when he was called? He should not be circumcised.
(Indeed, when Gentiles, who do not have the law, do by nature things required by the law, they are a law for themselves, even though they do not have the law.
kick
In a loud voice they sang: "Worthy is the Lamb, who was slain, to receive power and wealth and wisdom and strength and honor and glory and praise!"
A kind of tree, the fruit of which monkeys eat.
But some of them said, "By Beelzebub, the prince of demons, he is driving out demons."
In fact, as soon as she heard about him, a woman whose little daughter was possessed by an evil spirit came and fell at his feet.
know that a man is not justified by observing the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ. So we, too, have put our faith in Christ Jesus that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by observing the law, because by observing the law no one will be justified.
go inside
feel squeamish
But I tell you that it will be more bearable for Sodom on the day of judgment than for you.”
They were startled and frightened, thinking they saw a ghost.
We always carry around in our body the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our body.
The ocean swells and ebbs
His disciples answered, "But where in this remote place can anyone get enough bread to feed them?"
since you are going through the same struggle you saw I had, and now hear that I still have.
to be wrinkled or puckered
But no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth could open the scroll or even look inside it.
as you look forward to the day of God and speed its coming. That day will bring about the destruction of the heavens by fire, and the elements will melt in the heat.
Do you want to drink coffee?
"You are not yet fifty years old," the Jews said to him, "and you have seen Abraham!"
Having lost all sensitivity, they have given themselves over to sensuality so as to indulge in every kind of impurity, with a continual lust for more.
Wail for the dead.
To consider
For example, if someone is getting married, the only thing they will be discussing is how much brideprice they will give up front for that girl.
Lift up one hand
On the next Sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear the word of the Lord.
soul
When a chicken is a mother, it goes ahead of its chicks when it scratches as it looks for something to have her offspring eat.
Therefore God has mercy on whom he wants to have mercy, and he hardens whom he wants to harden.
The people who were at the pool when their companion was drowning, they were stymied as to what to do in order to rescue
We proclaim him, admonishing and teaching everyone with all wisdom, so that we may present everyone perfect in Christ.
We are therefore Christ's ambassadors, as though God were making his appeal through us. We implore you on Christ's behalf: Be reconciled to God.
We are expecting that we have something good.
Peter said to her, “How could you conspire to test the Spirit of the Lord? Listen! The feet of the men who buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out also.”
bump into
fiber from palm tree used for starting fire
In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, we command you, brothers and sisters, to keep away from every believer who is idle and disruptive and does not live according to the teaching you received from us.
My fellow prisoner Aristarchus sends you his greetings, as does Mark, the cousin of Barnabas. (You have received instructions about him; if he comes to you, welcome him.)
But whoever disowns me before others, I will disown before my Father in heaven.
Meanwhile Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him, “Are you the king of the Jews?” “You have said so,” Jesus replied.
The following night the Lord stood near Paul and said, "Take courage! As you have testified about me in Jerusalem, so you must also testify in Rome."
As for armed bands long ago, they were bad because they massacred those who had no fault.
There is a person who marks his piglet, he will cut off [part of] its tail.
For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife,
Jesus asked the boy's father, "How long has he been like this?"
coffin
“He will bring those wretches to a wretched end,” they replied, “and he will rent the vineyard to other tenants, who will give him his share of the crop at harvest time.”
If we are severely dizzy, we will vomit.
But when this priest had offered for all time one sacrifice for sins, he sat down at the right hand of God.
The older person will say, "Get a chicken to waver to remove your bad luck."
skirt
In the church at Antioch there were prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen (who had been brought up with Herod the tetrarch) and Saul.
sit cross-legged
limp
Kind of sugarcane.
His own full younger sibling.
wrinkle
Having spirit bodies
When a woman is pregnant, her stomach protrudes; that is it becomes rounded.
What has happened to all your joy? I can testify that, if you could have done so, you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me.
God spoke to him in this way: ‘For four hundred years your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own, and they will be enslaved and mistreated.
The chickens are all lined up on the roost.
As for others, rat poison can poison an enemy.
Then they looked for a way to arrest him because they knew he had spoken the parable against them. But they were afraid of the crowd; so they left him and went away.
I sent Tychicus to Ephesus.
In our place, it is necessary that we be well-behaved so that we won't be discredited
Knowledge
This is the passage of Scripture the eunuch was reading: “He was led like a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before its shearer is silent, so he did not open his mouth.
We forget about our companions [when] we simply abandon them.
A kind of rattan.
Keep your lives free from the love of money and be content with what you have, because God has said, "Never will I leave you; never will I forsake you."
Flavor
small edible fresh water shell fish.
You, then, why do you judge your brother or sister? Or why do you treat them with contempt? For we will all stand before God’s judgment seat.
How dreadful it will be in those days for pregnant women and nursing mothers! There will be great distress in the land and wrath against this people.
Pig.
To sniff at one's cheek
Now the overseer is to be above reproach, faithful to his wife, temperate, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, able to teach,
heart.
He is a good person because he makes sure that the money reaches the owner of the corn.
The power of the horses was in their mouths and in their tails; for their tails were like snakes, having heads with which they inflict injury.
agree to marriage
Sky
I'll be expecting your return on that third day.
Nose.
When he arrived and saw what the grace of God had done, he was glad and encouraged them all to remain true to the Lord with all their hearts.
And out of the smoke locusts came down on the earth and were given power like that of scorpions of the earth.
"Who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his counselor?"
To come into clear view.
isolated
To deceive.
That day Herod and Pilate became friends--before this they had been enemies.
These are a shadow of the things that were to come; the reality, however, is found in Christ.
daughter-in-law
A tree with cotton-like pods which can be used for pillows
And now it is because of my hope in what God has promised our ancestors that I am on trial today.
How can we thank God enough for you in return for all the joy we have in the presence of our God because of you?
“The ten horns you saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but who for one hour will receive authority as kings along with the beast.
true,
They are darkened in their understanding and separated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them due to the hardening of their hearts.
down the middle of the great street of the city. On each side of the river stood the tree of life, bearing twelve crops of fruit, yielding its fruit every month. And the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations.
give thanks in all circumstances; for this is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.
So Paul stayed in Corinth for a year and a half, teaching them the word of God.
I am writing these things to you about those who are trying to lead you astray.
He opened his mouth to blaspheme God, and to slander his name and his dwelling place and those who live in heaven.
Plane
When his family heard about this, they went to take charge of him, for they said, "He is out of his mind."
A person with his dog pursued a pig which was wounded by a sharpened stake.
Jesus answered, "I did tell you, but you do not believe. The miracles I do in my Father's name speak for me,
refuse
and to put on the new self, created to be like God in true righteousness and holiness.
to be broken loose from a marriage relationship
moved by current
Devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful and thankful.
There are [some] people who cannot be relied upon who will pilfer my things.
Everyone will be salted with fire. "Salt is good, but if it loses its saltiness, how can you make it salty again? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with each other."
Even though my illness was a trial to you, you did not treat me with contempt or scorn. Instead, you welcomed me as if I were an angel of God, as if I were Christ Jesus himself.
Fame.
They devour widows' houses and for a show make lengthy prayers. Such men will be punished most severely."
have one crossed eye.
to be afraid
As for a ladder, it has two leaning posts which have pieces that are laid horizontally, and those are the steps.
without love, unforgiving, slanderous, without self-control, brutal, not lovers of the good,
"Meanwhile, the older son was in the field. When he came near the house, he heard music and dancing.
Though you have not seen him, you love him; and even though you do not see him now, you believe in him and are filled with an inexpressible and glorious joy,
“Settle matters quickly with your adversary who is taking you to court. Do it while you are still together on the way, or your adversary may hand you over to the judge, and the judge may hand you over to the officer, and you may be thrown into prison.
Some of those present were saying indignantly to one another, "Why this waste of perfume?
It is written in the Prophets: 'They will all be taught by God.' Everyone who listens to the Father and learns from him comes to me.
“Look,” he said, “I see heaven open and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.”
Give birth to a mixed breed
We’re stepsister.
Yolk of egg
clear the way before
plant with a stick
A lizard about 5 or 6 inches long which has a green back, light colored belly and brown tail.
Soak oneself
Bolo sheath
Remember Lot’s wife!
Anyone who receives instruction in the word must share all good things with his instructor.
She isn’t a nice-looking woman
But the man who had received one bag went off, dug a hole in the ground and hid his master’s money.
We will plant camote stems today because we have burned our fields.
For example, by law a married woman is bound to her husband as long as he is alive, but if her husband dies, she is released from the law that binds her to him.
So they went away by themselves in a boat to a solitary place.
turn around
Going to Pilate, he asked for Jesus' body.
I am talking to you Gentiles. Inasmuch as I am the apostle to the Gentiles, I make much of my ministry
And God raised us up with Christ and seated us with him in the heavenly realms in Christ Jesus,
"Teacher," they said, "Moses wrote for us that if a man's brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man must marry the widow and have children for his brother.
become contaminated or dirty by helping at birth or illness.
Mildewed corn
You, don't whisper so loudly because there are those who are sleeping.
crooked; having multiple curves as sweet potato plant or a sundang blade
And when she finds it, she calls her friends and neighbors together and says, 'Rejoice with me; I have found my lost coin.'
God did this so that, by two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled to take hold of the hope offered to us may be greatly encouraged.
‘Even the dust of your town that sticks to our feet we wipe off against you. Yet be sure of this: The kingdom of God has come near.’
He seized the dragon, that ancient serpent, who is the devil, or Satan, and bound him for a thousand years.  He threw him into the Abyss, and locked and sealed it over him, to keep him from deceiving the nations anymore until the thousand years were ended. After that, he must be set free for a short time.
When the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Samaria had accepted the word of God, they sent Peter and John to Samaria.
then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.
“What are we going to do with these men?” they asked. “Everyone living in Jerusalem knows they have performed a notable sign, and we cannot deny it.
While they were there, the time came for the baby to be born,
You won't be able to take it until there is something to use as a guarantee which makes the agreement about when you will pay the remainder.
As Jesus and his disciples were on their way, he came to a village where a woman named Martha opened her home to him.
When the day of Pentecost came, they were all together in one place.
fulfill
To reciprocate in work
where they got into a boat and set off across the lake for Capernaum. By now it was dark, and Jesus had not yet joined them.
The church sent them on their way, and as they traveled through Phoenicia and Samaria, they told how the Gentiles had been converted. This news made all the believers very glad.
Consequently, just as one trespass resulted in condemnation for all people, so also one righteous act resulted in justification and life for all people.
I credited your horse first and then [as for] collecting,  you will ask about the payment for your horse.
large seed
I am reminded of your sincere faith, which first lived in your grandmother Lois and in your mother Eunice and, I am persuaded, now lives in you also.
and, as another scripture says, "They will look on the one they have pierced."
The Lord will rescue me from every evil attack and will bring me safely to his heavenly kingdom. To him be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
feed
Don’t you have a saying, ‘It’s still four months until harvest’? I tell you, open your eyes and look at the fields! They are ripe for harvest.
feel rushed
black crayfish with white markings
To accidentally ram into something
All the saints send you greetings, especially those who belong to Caesar's household.
Dialect variation of "huus"
remove what is caught from a trap
A destitute person who is always being scolded, when [the criticism] affects him deeply emotionally so that he can no longer endure it, he will have to react.
He told them: “Take nothing for the journey—no staff, no bag, no bread, no money, no extra shirt.
To be together; next to each other
When it has become afternoon, we place the chicken basket on the ground and then the mother will go inside and and [her chicks] will be collected.
We beat with one drumstick on a [hanging] gong, and we beat a rhythm on a drum.
eat by oneself or to serve oneself
After he had left the crowd and entered the house, his disciples asked him about this parable.
For I think it is unreasonable to send on a prisoner without specifying the charges against him."
climb down.
We’ll go and see Maria.
The paper will tear raggedly.
I tell you, he will see that they get justice, and quickly. However, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on the earth?”
afflicted by an illness believed to be a result of meeting a long-haired spirit while bathing in a river or stream.
The four living creatures said, "Amen," and the elders fell down and worshiped.
But I have nothing definite to write to His Majesty about him. Therefore I have brought him before all of you, and especially before you, King Agrippa, so that as a result of this investigation I may have something to write.
They brought to the Pharisees the man who had been blind.
face
The sins of some are obvious, reaching the place of judgment ahead of them; the sins of others trail behind them.
root or foot of a tree trunk; buttocks; downstream end of a raft
Two-yard piece of material
point of knife
The carabao which is pulling a cart as it hauls corn will experience difficulty if there are those who ride on it.
By faith Moses, when he had grown up, refused to be known as the son of Pharaoh's daughter.
The matchbox, its body was fitted together.
A person would say something like, "What is that dog after?"
Undoubtedly there are all sorts of languages in the world, yet none of them is without meaning.
Before the famine reached them, Boybayan went after wild camotes.
To be industrious, not lazy.
Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya near Cyrene; visitors from Rome
but the one who stands firm to the end will be saved.
I got tired of waiting for you; I was here earlier.
Oops! His shirt has been torn.
Then Agrippa said to Paul, "Do you think that in such a short time you can persuade me to be a Christian?"
To eat alone when there is no other choice
Then they worshiped him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy.
Someone asked him, "Lord, are only a few people going to be saved?"
Those who want to make a good impression outwardly are trying to compel you to be circumcised. The only reason they do this is to avoid being persecuted for the cross of Christ.
smile
The hard shell, that is the body of the creatures like crabs, turtles, certain shellfish, water snails, pointed shellfish, land snails, certain edible shellfish, clams, and small clams.
tinny, clattering sound
come over to meet someone
I brought him to your disciples, but they could not heal him.”
I get wet when I fetch water.
For the pagans run after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them.
Even tax collectors came to be baptized. “Teacher,” they asked, “what should we do?”
When the sweet potatoes start to break through the soil, the soil cracks but the fruits cannot be seen yet.
“The Jewish people all know the way I have lived ever since I was a child, from the beginning of my life in my own country, and also in Jerusalem.
All men will hate you because of me.
Since they did not know the righteousness of God and sought to establish their own, they did not submit to God’s righteousness.
always or frequently
flock together to feed
accompany or deliver something partway
It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you, and of a kind that does not occur even among pagans: A man has his father's wife.
We are glad whenever we are weak but you are strong; and our prayer is that you may be fully restored.
to smile
Claudius Lysias, To His Excellency, Governor Felix: Greetings.
hemorrhage
To overwork someone.
Who, being in very nature God, did not consider equality with God something to be grasped,
Jesus replied, “Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning.
To look out at
Once I was alive apart from the law; but when the commandment came, sin sprang to life and I died.
To stare
River near the Agusan Davao boundary.
If anyone forces you to go one mile, go with them two miles.
The people long ago would cut a piece of bamboo which was about the size of a pole which was used to measure a diagram of a house in order to establish where the rooms, the porch and the doors will be.
Having received the commander's permission, Paul stood on the steps and motioned to the crowd. When they were all silent, he said to them in Aramaic :
As for a person who has a cough, the one who has a whooping cough is always coughing because his throat is itching.
When they came back from the tomb, they told all these things to the Eleven and to all the others.
Then they can train the younger women to love their husbands and children,
and many Jews had come to Martha and Mary to comfort them in the loss of their brother.
But he denied it. "I don't know or understand what you're talking about," he said, and went out into the entryway.
fetish used to prevent rain and to kill enemies
Converse, discuss.
And our hope for you is firm, because we know that just as you share in our sufferings, so also you share in our comfort.
In a large house there are articles not only of gold and silver, but also of wood and clay; some are for noble purposes and some for ignoble.
To beat something with one drumstick (on a hanging gong)
commend someone on their good behavior.
Paul acknowledged his [role as] slave to Jesus because he had become his servant.
if you continue in your faith, established and firm, not moved from the hope held out in the gospel. This is the gospel that you heard and that has been proclaimed to every creature under heaven, and of which I, Paul, have become a servant.
Consider the people of Israel: Do not those who eat the sacrifices participate in the altar?
To quit some activity
Abug is airborn dust from the ground.
When someone pounds rice, many rice [grains] fly out of the mortar as a result of our striking [them with the pestle].
You know that I have not hesitated to preach anything that would be helpful to you but have taught you publicly and from house to house.
What you heard from me, keep as the pattern of sound teaching, with faith and love in Christ Jesus.
When they had crossed over, they landed at Gennesaret and anchored there.
Do not believe me unless I do what my Father does.
The bongit, okang, kulagu, and pulow owls only call at night. When they hoot, the older people mistakenly think they are evil spirits.
guard
When the Pharisees saw this, they said to him, “Look! Your disciples are doing what is unlawful on the Sabbath.”
I counsel you to buy from me gold refined in the fire, so you can become rich; and white clothes to wear, so you can cover your shameful nakedness; and salve to put on your eyes, so you can see.
These were his instructions: "Take nothing for the journey except a staff--no bread, no bag, no money in your belts.
The evening meal was in progress, and the devil had already prompted Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, to betray Jesus.
We accept man's testimony, but God's testimony is greater because it is the testimony of God, which he has given about his Son.
To Titus, my true son in our common faith: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior.
If some unbeliever invites you to a meal and you want to go, eat whatever is put before you without raising questions of conscience.
Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: “The one I kiss is the man; arrest him.”
When it arrives, it finds the house swept clean and put in order.
"What shall I do, then, with the one you call the king of the Jews?" Pilate asked them.
Every year Jesus’ parents went to Jerusalem for the Festival of the Passover.
requesting
"Yes, Lord," she replied, "but even the dogs under the table eat the children's crumbs.
kindling wood
Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name,
heavy
Feed her the rice.
We
"But God said to him, 'You fool! This very night your life will be demanded from you. Then who will get what you have prepared for yourself?'
She will take care of her child while the mother is working.  She will hold the child on her lap.  Have it nurse.
The person who uses a light to fish for frogs spears them with a multiple-pronged spear.
The person who has finished harvesting, he removes the old plants as he weeds.
And that is just what I did in Jerusalem. On the authority of the chief priests, I put many of the Lord’s people in prison, and when they were put to death, I cast my vote against them.
chatter
And if your eye causes you to sin, pluck it out. It is better for you to enter the kingdom of God with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into hell,
He came to Derbe and then to Lystra, where a disciple named Timothy lived, whose mother was a Jewess and a believer, but whose father was a Greek.
Three times I pleaded with the Lord to take it away from me.
The small fishhook will be baited with an earthworm.
finger (of a person)
If I speak in the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, I am only a resounding gong or a clanging cymbal.
Finally, the woman died too.
The fin by the fish's ear is what determines the movement of the body of that fish.
dislike
To call by name
"Then he said, 'This is what I'll do. I will tear down my barns and build bigger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my goods.
Half.
What shall we conclude then? Do we have any advantage? Not at all! For we have already made the charge that Jews and Gentiles alike are all under the power of sin.
They seized Peter and John and, because it was evening, they put them in jail until the next day.
but now revealed and made known through the prophetic writings by the command of the eternal God, so that all nations might believe and obey him--
I keep asking that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the glorious Father, may give you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, so that you may know him better.
I know your deeds, your hard work and your perseverance. I know that you cannot tolerate wicked people, that you have tested those who claim to be apostles but are not, and have found them false.
But Jesus answered, "No more of this!" And he touched the man's ear and healed him.
so that with one mind and one voice you may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
and the chief priests and the teachers of the law were looking for some way to get rid of Jesus, for they were afraid of the people.
Light rain of short duration.
I, Paul, am writing this with my own hand. I will pay it back--not to mention that you owe me your very self.
banana
If anyone is to go into captivity, into captivity they will go. If anyone is to be killed with the sword, with the sword they will be killed. This calls for patient endurance and faithfulness on the part of God’s people.
become stiff, as in frozen fish
That is why I am so eager to preach the gospel also to you who are in Rome.
A young man, wearing nothing but a linen garment, was following Jesus. When they seized him,
A little later someone else saw him and said, "You also are one of them." "Man, I am not!" Peter replied.
To put up with, as a person.
because he almost died for the work of Christ, risking his life to make up for the help you could not give me.
Jesus said, “You believe because I told you I saw you under the fig tree. You will see greater things than that.”
have a difficult time in childbirth
Swift
Then Jesus said to them, “I ask you, which is lawful on the Sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to destroy it?”
These sweet potatoes are crowding each other because they have many tubers (lit. fruits).
Everyone who heard him was amazed at his understanding and his answers.
If a child is extremely hot, he will jerk.
to be safe or secure
For we were all baptized by one Spirit into one body--whether Jews or Greeks, slave or free--and we were all given the one Spirit to drink.
We cannot be freed unless we have been redeemed/ransomed. It comes from that which was used as a ransom.
shallow water hole in a creek or river crossing
“I do not accept glory from human beings,
Keep on loving each other as brothers.
I know what I’ll do so that, when I lose my job here, people will welcome me into their houses.’
Enter through the narrow gate. For wide is the gate and broad is the road that leads to destruction, and many enter through it.
Destination, or place to go to
Not to weed in center of a field
affected
Now the day on which Jesus had made the mud and opened the man’s eyes was a Sabbath.
Then Jesus' disciples said, "Now you are speaking clearly and without figures of speech.
to the church of the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven. You have come to God, the judge of all men, to the spirits of righteous men made perfect,
Therefore, anyone who swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it.
become dirty or contaminated
Night and day among the tombs and in the hills he would cry out and cut himself with stones.
In fact, none of the seven left any children. Last of all, the woman died too.
A crowd was sitting around him, and they told him, "Your mother and brothers are outside looking for you."
medium -sized knife
Turkeys, geese, ducks, small geese, all have wings.
But Peter kept on knocking, and when they opened the door and saw him, they were astonished.
turn one’s head
and have the most important seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets.
Then Philip began with that very passage of Scripture and told him the good news about Jesus.
Then a mighty angel picked up a boulder the size of a large millstone and threw it into the sea, and said: “With such violence the great city of Babylon will be thrown down, never to be found again.
rouse from sleep without becoming fully alert.
The student is not above the teacher, nor a servant above his master.
The one who commits incest is the one who marries someone who is closely related.
stop
So the spies questioned him: "Teacher, we know that you speak and teach what is right, and that you do not show partiality but teach the way of God in accordance with the truth.
cross
pale, anemic
Or haven’t you read in the Law that the priests on Sabbath duty in the temple desecrate the Sabbath and yet are innocent?
another of the same kind
A fishing net will ravel if it is caught on something unless it is knotted as it is being made.
lay a body “in state”
There were many people who wore g-strings at that time long ago.
"Behold, I come like a thief! Blessed is he who stays awake and keeps his clothes with him, so that he may not go naked and be shamefully exposed." Then they gathered the kings together to the place that in Hebrew is called Armageddon.
Therefore I am all the more eager to send him, so that when you see him again you may be glad and I may have less anxiety.
He will put the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.
A small, narrow chicken laying basket.
Now, brothers and sisters, if I come to you and speak in tongues, what good will I be to you, unless I bring you some revelation or knowledge or prophecy or word of instruction?
While everyone was marveling at all that Jesus did, he said to his disciples, "Listen carefully to what I am about to tell you: The Son of Man is going to be betrayed into the hands of men."
for which I am suffering even to the point of being chained like a criminal. But God’s word is not chained.
walk vigorously
Superlative particle; most, very much, especially.
Not even those who are circumcised obey the law, yet they want you to be circumcised that they may boast about your flesh.
A very tiny mosquito that comes out and bites, especially in the early evening.
Pasita fed Tumbasoy because she wasn’t embarrassed.
Garden
Wanting to satisfy the crowd, Pilate released Barabbas to them. He had Jesus flogged, and handed him over to be crucified.
Now that same day two of them were going to a village called Emmaus, about seven miles from Jerusalem.
masticate
They brought them before the magistrates and said, “These men are Jews, and are throwing our city into an uproar.”
When something gleams like gold, its glint is beautiful. Its gleam is soft.
The cats have red mites.
The python was curled up as it was lying in wait on the path of a pig.
When Jesus had entered Capernaum, a centurion came to him, asking for help.  “Lord,” he said, “my servant lies at home paralyzed, suffering terribly.”
He told them, "The secret of the kingdom of God has been given to you. But to those on the outside everything is said in parables
Jesus replied, “What is impossible with man is possible with God.”
Spill out accidentally
Perhaps the reason he was separated from you for a little while was that you might have him back for good--
Chocolate brown chicken
Circumcision has value if you observe the law, but if you break the law, you have become as though you had not been circumcised.
White
Did Centinales leave real early in the morning?
And pray in the Spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers and requests. With this in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for all the saints.
Taking Jesus' body, the two of them wrapped it, with the spices, in strips of linen. This was in accordance with Jewish burial customs.
He replied, “You give them something to eat.” They answered, “We have only five loaves of bread and two fish—unless we go and buy food for all this crowd.”
But Christ is faithful as the Son over God’s house. And we are his house, if indeed we hold firmly to our confidence and the hope in which we glory.
and when they found him, they exclaimed: "Everyone is looking for you!"
Paul, an apostle—sent not from men nor by a man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the dead— and all the brothers and sisters with me, To the churches in Galatia:
bump one’s forehead or knee.
As she was pouring the water on the flowers, a lapinid wasp nest got wet and so she was stung.
It was the third hour when they crucified him.
Hezekiah the father of Manasseh, Manasseh the father of Amon, Amon the father of Josiah,
because the Lord disciplines those he loves, and he punishes everyone he accepts as a son."
Indeed, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of God.”
"All this I have told you so that you will not go astray.
The corn will be skinny. The ears will be small.
Now Herod the tetrarch heard about all that was going on. And he was perplexed because some were saying that John had been raised from the dead,
Lung; a kind of fish.
As was the earthly man, so are those who are of the earth; and as is the man from heaven, so also are those who are of heaven.
But the sand by the ocean sparkles.
trade
pulsate, as one's heart or pulse
The next day John saw Jesus coming toward him and said, “Look, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!
Shoots of plants
To become pregnant
god of the hunt; lives in the clouds; betelnut and chickens are offered to him the night before a hunt.
I am astonished that you are so quickly deserting the one who called you to live in the grace of Christ and are turning to a different gospel—
To release, as a trigger of a trap.
To get at, or be effective against, as an illness.
claw
"O unbelieving generation," Jesus replied, "how long shall I stay with you? How long shall I put up with you? Bring the boy to me."
to submit to such as these and to everyone who joins in the work, and labors at it.
The base of a mountain, that is at the bottom of the incline which is the ending of the steep part.
"No one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment. If he does, the new piece will pull away from the old, making the tear worse.
so that no one would be unsettled by these trials. For you know quite well that we are destined for them.
To spit as of cat or dog; to hiss, sniff in disgust.
As you know, it was because of an illness that I first preached the gospel to you,
gift for paternal grandparents upon presenting a child
testimony
For if we have been united with him in a death like his, we will certainly also be united with him in a resurrection like his.
Where, then, is boasting? It is excluded. Because of what law? The law that requires works? No, because of the law that requires faith.
As for your old attitudes , don't add them onto  your new attitudes
The municipal town of Kapalong in Davao Province on the Liboganon River.
flyswatter made of rattan
There's just me
Brothers, pray for us
Crocodiles bite by snapping.
But, “Let the one who boasts boast in the Lord.”
The next day they let the cavalry go on with him, while they returned to the barracks.
As Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately. “Tell us,” they said, “when will this happen, and what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the age?”
Fish
excessively
Small house lizard
Many of the Samaritans from that town believed in him because of the woman’s testimony, “He told me everything I ever did.”
I have declared to both Jews and Greeks that they must turn to God in repentance and have faith in our Lord Jesus.
They cause [the house/village] to be taken by surprise when they have banded together in mass to attack so that they can kill all without exception.
rain in torrents, approaching rain
The child who has not yet been circumcised and who has something white on his penis, the foreskin will easily come off.
When you fast, do not look somber as the hypocrites do, for they disfigure their faces to show others they are fasting. Truly I tell you, they have received their reward in full.
charm for catching pigs
The pig trap, the noose trap [for a bird] and the noose trap [for a rat], all of them have a trigger which is that which releases the catch [on the trigger].
cure or heal
use a substitute name for an in-law
If we look carefully into water which is clear, we have a reflection there below us.
I can't carry that heavy burden. (or "I cannot solve that difficult problem.")
on the day he comes to be glorified in his holy people and to be marveled at among all those who have believed. This includes you, because you believed our testimony to you.
Name of a creek and a village
The child who happened to trip and fall, scraped his leg and it was abraded.
A bruised reed he will not break, and a smoldering wick he will not snuff out, till he has brought justice through to victory.
A rocky place.
To crack
stop
After this I heard what sounded like the roar of a great multitude in heaven shouting: “Hallelujah! Salvation and glory and power belong to our God,
After that, we who are still alive and are left will be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. And so we will be with the Lord forever.
What relation
For I myself am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. I tell this one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and that one, ‘Come,’ and he comes. I say to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
how many
Seated in a window was a young man named Eutychus, who was sinking into a deep sleep as Paul talked on and on. When he was sound asleep, he fell to the ground from the third story and was picked up dead.
To crow
I like this
Brothers, I urge you to bear with my word of exhortation, for I have written you only a short letter.
tips of sweet potato plants
If anyone speaks, he should do it as one speaking the very words of God. If anyone serves, he should do it with the strength God provides, so that in all things God may be praised through Jesus Christ. To him be the glory and the power for ever and ever. Amen.
“All these I have kept,” the young man said. “What do I still lack?”
When they had gone, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream. “Get up,” he said, “take the child and his mother and escape to Egypt. Stay there until I tell you, for Herod is going to search for the child to kill him.”
Whoever welcomes a prophet as a prophet will receive a prophet’s reward, and whoever welcomes a righteous person as a righteous person will receive a righteous person’s reward.
From the throne came flashes of lightning, rumblings and peals of thunder. Before the throne, seven lamps were blazing. These are the seven spirits of God.
And they praised God because of me.
The world and its desires pass away, but the man who does the will of God lives forever.
Immediately, something like scales fell from Saul’s eyes, and he could see again. He got up and was baptized,
When we play ball, we leap up as we throw the ball.
arm, hand
neither was man created for woman, but woman for man.
Kind of tree.
As for the person who has many visible veins, his veins can be seen because they protrude.
May the Lord make your love increase and overflow for each other and for everyone else, just as ours does for you.
When Elena worked as a housegirl in Davao, she was given instructions to pour water on the flowers.
In reply Jesus said: “A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, when he was attacked by robbers. They stripped him of his clothes, beat him and went away, leaving him half dead.
Bear in mind that our Lord's patience means salvation, just as our dear brother Paul also wrote you with the wisdom that God gave him.
Let's return to Maambago so that even though I will die I will be at our house.
black tick
But he denied it. "Woman, I don't know him," he said.
Stem of a plant such as sweet potato
When he learned that Jesus was under Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem at that time.
Even to this day when Moses is read, a veil covers their hearts.
Sitting down, Jesus called the Twelve and said, "If anyone wants to be first, he must be the very last, and the servant of all."
because he loves our nation and has built our synagogue.”
flap wings or flutter, as a bound chicken
We’ll be murdered if we aren’t set straight by the dove.
Peace I leave with you; my peace I give you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled and do not be afraid.
We always thank God for all of you and continually mention you in our prayers.
For I can testify about them that they are zealous for God, but their zeal is not based on knowledge.
Host
but that if a woman has long hair, it is her glory? For long hair is given to her as a covering.
Day after day, in the temple courts and from house to house, they never stopped teaching and proclaiming the good news that Jesus is the Messiah.
But we want to hear what your views are, for we know that people everywhere are talking against this sect."
What you have said in the dark will be heard in the daylight, and what you have whispered in the ear in the inner rooms will be proclaimed from the roofs.
Asa the father of Jehoshaphat, Jehoshaphat the father of Jehoram, Jehoram the father of Uzziah,
But only the high priest entered the inner room, and that only once a year, and never without blood, which he offered for himself and for the sins the people had committed in ignorance.
While Paul was waiting for them in Athens, he was greatly distressed to see that the city was full of idols.
When there are many [grubs] which are making whispery  and gurgling [sounds], then we split knotched pula palm log and we see many grubs which are squirming.
The fence is rotten.
weeds
preserve raw meat by placing it in a bamboo tube
If there is stinging medicine which we spread on our bodies, our skin smart.
For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of a huge fish, so the Son of Man will be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
resh water snail.
Now about brotherly love we do not need to write to you, for you yourselves have been taught by God to love each other.
For I tell you, I will not eat it again until it finds fulfillment in the kingdom of God."
"But a time is coming, and has come, when you will be scattered, each to his own home. You will leave me all alone. Yet I am not alone, for my Father is with me.
If a child sits, he also scoots forward if he cannot yet stand up.
You’re always lying to us.
bad luck
As it is, there are many parts, but one body.
I wrote to the church, but Diotrephes, who loves to be first, will have nothing to do with us.
The promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. Scripture does not say “and to seeds,” meaning many people, but “and to your seed,” meaning one person, who is Christ.
For I wrote you out of great distress and anguish of heart and with many tears, not to grieve you but to let you know the depth of my love for you.
To place between
and do not give the devil a foothold.
‘An enemy did this,’ he replied. The servants asked him, ‘Do you want us to go and pull them up?’
Index finger or toe.
Brothers, stop thinking like children. In regard to evil be infants, but in your thinking be adults.
In the one case, the tenth is collected by men who die; but in the other case, by him who is declared to be living.
On his robe and on his thigh he has this name written: KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.
happy
Indeed, beginning with Samuel, all the prophets who have spoken have foretold these days.  And you are heirs of the prophets and of the covenant God made with your fathers. He said to Abraham, ‘Through your offspring all peoples on earth will be blessed.’
But Abraham replied, ‘Son, remember that in your lifetime you received your good things, while Lazarus received bad things, but now he is comforted here and you are in agony.
Not.
So do not worry, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’
eat supper
For something to move its head up and down (insect)
By faith Joseph, when his end was near, spoke about the exodus of the Israelites from Egypt and gave instructions about his bones.
Shallow.
Deliver it quickly. We rush the delivery of something (cause the delivery to be quick).
hold or carry
I am no longer worthy to be called your son; make me like one of your hired men.
And the Lord's servant must not quarrel; instead, he must be kind to everyone, able to teach, not resentful.
We aren’t allowed a minute’s peace by the raiders.
The Holy Spirit was showing by this that the way into the Most Holy Place had not yet been disclosed as long as the first tabernacle was still standing.
Until now you have not asked for anything in my name. Ask and you will receive, and your joy will be complete.
For it is declared: "You are a priest forever, in the order of Melchizedek."
She’s forcing us [to give in] to her begging.
Do to others as you would have them do to you.
I tell you the truth, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.
The things that mark an apostle--signs, wonders and miracles--were done among you with great perseverance.
If someone is speared by a raider, the spear will pierce and go through [the body].
An impression, mark, bruise or raised area such as is made by pressure against some object or a result of a blow.
[they] are fetching camotes from others.
One of the experts in the law answered him, "Teacher, when you say these things, you insult us also."
I bumped my elbow against a chair.
All without exception
A large forest bird with a red head crest and long tail feathers.
If a woman smells something burning, her affection for that man will disappear.
And his affection for you is all the greater when he remembers that you were all obedient, receiving him with fear and trembling.
It teaches us to say "No" to ungodliness and worldly passions, and to live self-controlled, upright and godly lives in this present age,
Then he got into the boat and his disciples followed him.
sickness
kind of sugarcane
inadvertently happen
And when you pray, do not keep on babbling like pagans, for they think they will be heard because of their many words.
despise
When Jesus left there, the Pharisees and the teachers of the law began to oppose him fiercely and to besiege him with questions, waiting to catch him in something he might say.
Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved, but whoever does not believe will be condemned.
Those who have believing masters should not show them disrespect just because they are fellow believers. Instead, they should serve them even better because their masters are dear to them as fellow believers and are devoted to the welfare of their slaves. These are the things you are to teach and insist on.
push
far away
Animal flea
Which is easier: to say to the paralytic, 'Your sins are forgiven,' or to say, 'Get up, take your mat and walk'?
broad jump, leap
For David did not ascend to heaven, and yet he said, ‘The Lord said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand
shake, as a tree or house, caused by a person or supernatural force (not an earthquake)
Sometimes you were publicly exposed to insult and persecution; at other times you stood side by side with those who were so treated.
For whoever wants to save their life will lose it, but whoever loses their life for me will save it.
Cover
Estimate the height of the tree which has not yet been felled.
One kind of
repair
If we get a thorn in our foot, we will pick it out with a needle so that it will be removed.
What did you come for?
Finally, all of you, be like-minded, be sympathetic, love one another, be compassionate and humble.
If two people are going downriver [by raft/canoe], and if one gets ahead of the other and  there is one river bend distance between them, he will pursue [the other one] and then he will catch up
failure
If our companion is carrying something heavy, we will come alongside to help.
You are able to believe something when you know about it.
lack
I have become its servant by the commission God gave me to present to you the word of God in its fullness--
He asked for a writing tablet, and to everyone’s astonishment he wrote, “His name is John.”
Early on the first day of the week, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb and saw that the stone had been removed from the entrance.
Start plucking!
Murderer
smooth breath, feeling of peace
If someone orders [someone else] to kill [somebody], he will carry out
"O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you, how often I have longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you were not willing!
Bitter.
You show that you are a letter from Christ, the result of our ministry, written not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone but on tablets of human hearts.
good for making lumber
To obstruct (a path or one's view)
There are many houses but just one which will be received.
If people do not welcome you, leave their town and shake the dust off your feet as a testimony against them.”
In Damascus there was a disciple named Ananias. The Lord called to him in a vision, “Ananias!” “Yes, Lord,” he answered.
house
The seed falling on rocky ground refers to someone who hears the word and at once receives it with joy.
Three days later he called together the leaders of the Jews. When they had assembled, Paul said to them: "My brothers, although I have done nothing against our people or against the customs of our ancestors, I was arrested in Jerusalem and handed over to the Romans.
Let us, then, go to him outside the camp, bearing the disgrace he bore.
Spouse
For where you have envy and selfish ambition, there you find disorder and every evil practice.
There is a person who cannot see because his eyes are glazed over due to being covered with a white film.
As for you, the anointing you received from him remains in you, and you do not need anyone to teach you. But as his anointing teaches you about all things and as that anointing is real, not counterfeit--just as it has taught you, remain in him.
The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it.
God had planned something better for us so that only together with us would they be made perfect.
When it is summer, the sunny, dry weather is long.
To sit in such a manner as to be improperly exposed
please
cross a river or road
he said, “Go away. The girl is not dead but asleep.” But they laughed at him.
When Apollos wanted to go to Achaia, the brothers encouraged him and wrote to the disciples there to welcome him. On arriving, he was a great help to those who by grace had believed.
Now a slave has no permanent place in the family, but a son belongs to it forever.
depend on
The vine is used for ???
For one's legs and thighs to be spread apart when sitting or walking
insulting address to a woman
under
When they came to the home of the synagogue ruler, Jesus saw a commotion, with people crying and wailing loudly.
peer
When they heard about the resurrection of the dead, some of them sneered, but others said, "We want to hear you again on this subject."
To fall landing in sitting position
Lift up, as a light or one's hands
blow
The meaning of the sun going down is that it goes over the horizon. It goes out of sight.
A large crowd followed and pressed around him. And a woman was there who had been subject to bleeding for twelve years.
A deep scar or depression in the flesh left from a former wound.
Abdomen
Then I heard another voice from heaven say: “ ‘Come out of her, my people,’ so that you will not share in her sins, so that you will not receive any of her plagues;
Life is more than food, and the body more than clothes.
to tie up by wrapping something around securely as many crabs or fish in a leaf
To kiss as a sign of affection
We have to be hunkered down because we are afraid that we might be seen.
“I too was convinced that I ought to do all that was possible to oppose the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
“It is written,” he said to them, “‘My house will be called a house of prayer,’ but you are making it ‘a den of robbers.’”
(He meant Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, who, though one of the Twelve, was later to betray him.)
The twelve gates were twelve pearls, each gate made of a single pearl. The great street of the city was of pure gold, like transparent glass.
For I have come down from heaven not to do my will but to do the will of him who sent me.
Paul, Silas and Timothy, To the church of the Thessalonians in God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
may have power, together with all the Lord’s holy people, to grasp how wide and long and high and deep is the love of Christ,
morally bad
slap or knock
Give her as much torment and grief as the glory and luxury she gave herself. In her heart she boasts, ‘I sit enthroned as queen. I am not a widow; I will never mourn.’
Peter asked, "Lord, why can't I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you."
Fare
call one’s dog
different
Small red-breasted parrot resembling a "love bird"
salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us—
As he began the settlement, a man who owed him ten thousand bags of gold was brought to him.
traditional skirt
They promise them freedom, while they themselves are slaves of depravity- -for a man is a slave to whatever has mastered him.
He will cut him to pieces and assign him a place with the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
To mutter to oneself, similar to mugunmugun but different from a whisper
set upon something
Circular growth of hair
"Are you so dull?" he asked. "Don't you see that nothing that enters a man from the outside can make him 'unclean'?
Light
hand this man over to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved on the day of the Lord.
new
roast meat
capture
to solve a difficult problem
Sternum
cluster
They devour widows' houses and for a show make lengthy prayers. Such men will be punished most severely."
kind of mottled rice
And he said to them, "I have eagerly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.
And he died for all, that those who live should no longer live for themselves but for him who died for them and was raised again.
Be hungry
Since we have these promises, dear friends, let us purify ourselves from everything that contaminates body and spirit, perfecting holiness out of reverence for God.
To pray or sacrifice
What, after all, is Apollos? And what is Paul? Only servants, through whom you came to believe—as the Lord has assigned to each his task.
And David says: “May their table become a snare and a trap, a stumbling block and a retribution for them.
by advocating customs unlawful for us Romans to accept or practice."
One of three original Ata siblings who ascended into heaven.
If a rope is pulled out from a spool, it will be stretched out.
I would not want someone else to take any [rambatan fruits]. The meaning of that is to keep for oneself.
I wanted to know why they were accusing him, so I brought him to their Sanhedrin.
He said to her, "Daughter, your faith has healed you. Go in peace and be freed from your suffering."
sweet palm drink (from fish palm)
But we have this treasure in jars of clay to show that this all-surpassing power is from God and not from us.
So after I have completed this task and have made sure that they have received this fruit, I will go to Spain and visit you on the way.
Fine linen, bright and clean, was given her to wear.” (Fine linen stands for the righteous acts of God’s holy people.)
In all my prayers for all of you, I always pray with joy
Then Peter stood up with the Eleven, raised his voice and addressed the crowd: “Fellow Jews and all of you who live in Jerusalem, let me explain this to you; listen carefully to what I say.
“You are the light of the world. A town built on a hill cannot be hidden.
pass by
In speaking of the angels he says, “He makes his angels spirits, and his servants flames of fire.”
what about the one whom the Father set apart as his very own and sent into the world? Why then do you accuse me of blasphemy because I said, 'I am God's Son'?
He withdrew about a stone's throw beyond them, knelt down and prayed,
We should not test the Lord, as some of them did--and were killed by snakes.
sleep
When all the people saw him walking and praising God,
I had not expected that I would be able to teach the father and the daughter (lit. offspring).
But you know that Timothy has proved himself, because as a son with his father he has served with me in the work of the gospel.
to beat a rhythm using both hands, as on a drum
But the centurion wanted to spare Paul's life and kept them from carrying out their plan. He ordered those who could swim to jump overboard first and get to land.
adhere something to another, as a bandage
For those God foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brothers and sisters.
Formerly he was useless to you, but now he has become useful both to you and to me.
Fat will make one's stomach feel uncomfortable.
Crazy
that everyone who believes may have eternal life in him.”
When we are frying something and we put the meat [in the pan], the heat sears [the meat].
Your intention is bad.
Because I was confident of this, I planned to visit you first so that you might benefit twice.
Be slow to carry out an activity or fulfill a request.
A plant with smooth, flexible stems which has a soft, spongy core.
Then the disciples came to him and asked, “Do you know that the Pharisees were offended when they heard this?”
He went away a second time and prayed, “My Father, if it is not possible for this cup to be taken away unless I drink it, may your will be done.”
Good or bad omen.
For the moon to shine
You
A multiple-pronged spear.
If the whole body were an eye, where would the sense of hearing be? If the whole body were an ear, where would the sense of smell be?
You gladly put up with fools since you are so wise!
When the pig has been cooked, they strip the bones which still have flesh on them.
We live next door to each other.
I hate of him
Jesus said to the woman, “Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”
My brothers, as believers in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ, don't show favoritism.
slingshot
Rise! Let us go! Here comes my betrayer!”
disbelieve
Then Jesus told them this parable:
You’re bossy
Be diligent in these matters; give yourself wholly to them, so that everyone may see your progress.
retract
entrust
new rolled up leaf
spread something out
“Sir,” they said, “we remember that while he was still alive that deceiver said, ‘After three days I will rise again.’
They will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads.
If it is an adult who cries to go along, he will pressure the person into letting him come.
Jesus was driving out a demon that was mute. When the demon left, the man who had been mute spoke, and the crowd was amazed.
wave of the sea
Then Levi held a great banquet for Jesus at his house, and a large crowd of tax collectors and others were eating with them.
Again they tried to seize him, but he escaped their grasp.
Watch out for those dogs, those evildoers, those mutilators of the flesh.
As they stretched him out to flog him, Paul said to the centurion standing there, "Is it legal for you to flog a Roman citizen who hasn't even been found guilty?"
Then Peter said, “Surely no one can stand in the way of their being baptized with water. They have received the Holy Spirit just as we have.”
bamboo spear
Join with others in following my example, brothers, and take note of those who live according to the pattern we gave you.
Neither has Herod, for he sent him back to us; as you can see, he has done nothing to deserve death.
rush someone
I do wish, brother, that I may have some benefit from you in the Lord; refresh my heart in Christ.
Then the crowd there turned on Sosthenes the synagogue leader and beat him in front of the proconsul; and Gallio showed no concern whatever.
To drag, haul, pull, tow
Ear wax
“Why do you call me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ and do not do what I say?
Remedy.
So the men were sent off and went down to Antioch, where they gathered the church together and delivered the letter.
storage shelter
Now the law requires the descendants of Levi who become priests to collect a tenth from the people--that is, their brothers--even though their brothers are descended from Abraham.
God did this so that men would seek him and perhaps reach out for him and find him, though he is not far from each one of us.
And while they were eating, he said, “Truly I tell you, one of you will betray me.”
To be crazy, demented
This brought Paul and Barnabas into sharp dispute and debate with them. So Paul and Barnabas were appointed, along with some other believers, to go up to Jerusalem to see the apostles and elders about this question.
Container
Jesus went on to say, “To what, then, can I compare the people of this generation? What are they like?
Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
On one occasion an expert in the law stood up to test Jesus. “Teacher,” he asked, “what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
God is spirit, and his worshipers must worship in the Spirit and in truth.”
Now, however, I am on my way to Jerusalem in the service of the saints there.
“and about judgment, because the prince of this world now stands condemned.”
When you fish with a spear, you watch for the silver-colored fish when it is still far away. When it passes near, you spear it as you jab/thrust at it.
There are some who scold only with their mouth(s). There are those who strike when they get after [someone].
axe
To grasp
Then he went upstairs again and broke bread and ate. After talking until daylight, he left.
Since you call on a Father who judges each man's work impartially, live your lives as strangers here in reverent fear.
Then I heard a voice telling me, ‘Get up, Peter. Kill and eat.’
[She/they??] regret having married.
stain
to chop into pieces as chicken or fruit
Newly sprouted baby teeth of an animal
"Blessed is the coming kingdom of our father David!" "Hosanna in the highest!"
enemy
If one doesn’t know how to use a bolo, he ineffectively cuts the wood.
God exalted him to his own right hand as Prince and Savior that he might bring Israel to repentance and forgive their sins.
Don’t you be upset, because I’m still here.
He spoke plainly about this, and Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him.
He's forgotten to give it to us.
endure silently
The person who speaks forthrightly, his speech is straight. He does not speak in a roundabout way.
Be careful not to practice your righteousness in front of others to be seen by them. If you do, you will have no reward from your Father in heaven.
The hard, intact outer shell of a dead palm tree left after the pulp has rotted out.
Be delirious of raw foods
tiny-grained red rice.
Throwing his cloak aside, he jumped to his feet and came to Jesus.
Jesus continued: "There was a man who had two sons.
One day as Jesus was standing by the Lake of Gennesaret, the people were crowding around him and listening to the word of God.
If someone is ill, he accuses someone of using poison. He thinks he something was added t]o his water or food].
When the islanders saw the snake hanging from his hand, they said to each other, “This man must be a murderer; for though he escaped from the sea, the goddess Justice has not allowed him to live.”
For you have been born again, not of perishable seed, but of imperishable, through the living and enduring word of God.
News of this spread through all that region.
A person says, “Why is this fense [here]” We will reply, “We have sectioned it off for seed
white-headed when all hairs have turned grey
Since we keep going back and forth to our work, then I am becoming weary.
As for a ladder, it has two leaning posts and there are cross-pieces.
And we will be ready to punish every act of disobedience, once your obedience is complete.
but you do not believe because you are not my sheep.
The new rolled up leaf of the taro plant is good as a vegetable.
and Josiah the father of Jeconiah and his brothers at the time of the exile to Babylon.
These are the men who divide you, who follow mere natural instincts and do not have the Spirit.
You hold it out, I will take it
withdraw alone
Now Jesus had not yet entered the village, but was still at the place where Martha had met him.
When the crowd saw what Paul had done, they shouted in the Lycaonian language, “The gods have come down to us in human form!”
deep
But I tell you, it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you.
tentatively ask
But God gives it a body as he has determined, and to each kind of seed he gives its own body.
bad or serious (as in a cough)
I’ll plant millet and corn the day the field is burnt.
Ruthie has a twin
When one is possessed by the spirit, she sucks raw chicken blood.
cluck
language shorthand
Meanwhile, when a crowd of many thousands had gathered, so that they were trampling on one another, Jesus began to speak first to his disciples, saying: "Be on your guard against the yeast of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
implicate someone
Sleep deprived
trap
Galvanized iron sheet metal
to be physically difficult (like digging hard soil)
We moved along the coast with difficulty and came to a place called Fair Havens, near the town of Lasea.
That which we-excl. learned as we attended the seminar, we likewise will repeat that which we know to the people  to whom the hand-operated [players] will be given.
wing of a bird or chicken
catch up
If I have made a deposit on a carabao calf but I cannot follow through to pay for it, the money I paid to hold it will not be returned because it will be forfeited.
A kind of bird
A kind of sugarcane.
shake out, as a rug or a flour sack
travel
lame, crippled in the legs
Submit yourselves, then, to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God, and everyone who loves the father loves his child as well.
He answered, “The one who sowed the good seed is the Son of Man.
For of this you can be sure: No immoral, impure or greedy person—such a person is an idolater—has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.
For Scripture says, “Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain,” and “The worker deserves his wages.”
block or fill in a space.
Jesus answered, “If you want to be perfect, go, sell your possessions and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me.”
Later Jesus appeared to the Eleven as they were eating; he rebuked them for their lack of faith and their stubborn refusal to believe those who had seen him after he had risen.
Warn a divisive person once, and then warn him a second time. After that, have nothing to do with him.
By this time it was late in the day, so his disciples came to him. "This is a remote place," they said, "and it's already very late.
Lower abdomen; bridge of pelvic bone
move to another location
Rather, as servants of God we commend ourselves in every way: in great endurance; in troubles, hardships and distresses;
Now it is required that those who have been given a trust must prove faithful.
express
As soon as I tried to request [something], he gave [it] to me.
And anyone who swears by heaven swears by God’s throne and by the one who sits on it.
A person who is catching crabs with his/her hands, lifts the rocks off so that he/she can pick up the crab(s).
Strong improbability
They were greatly disturbed because the apostles were teaching the people, proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection of the dead.
But when they did not find them, they dragged Jason and some other believers before the city officials, shouting: “These men who have caused trouble all over the world have now come here,
The one being pointed out  is Jesus.
And he left them and went out of the city to Bethany, where he spent the night.
I was too big for it.
The lasangan fungus which grows where it is damp which is like the kolop fungus, it also shines because it has phosphorescence.
cigarette
For John had been saying to Herod, "It is not lawful for you to have your brother's wife."
We’ll finish drying the rice
To be silent.
He was chosen before the creation of the world, but was revealed in these last times for your sake.
If there are papayas, it’s good to jab them.
They will say, “Where is this ‘coming’ he promised? Ever since our ancestors died, everything goes on as it has since the beginning of creation.”
solitary tree
The crowd came up and asked Pilate to do for them what he usually did.
All these people gave their gifts out of their wealth; but she out of her poverty put in all she had to live on."
No one has ever gone into heaven except the one who came from heaven—the Son of Man.
For they mouth empty, boastful words and, by appealing to the lustful desires of sinful human nature, they entice people who are just escaping from those who live in error.
A person who lacks good manners
If some of the branches have been broken off, and you, though a wild olive shoot, have been grafted in among the others and now share in the nourishing sap from the olive root,
Teach the older men to be temperate, worthy of respect, self-controlled, and sound in faith, in love and in endurance.
to try to obtain pigs, horses, or chickens (men only)
It doesn't matter that it is small.
One man ran, filled a sponge with wine vinegar, put it on a stick, and offered it to Jesus to drink. "Now leave him alone. Let's see if Elijah comes to take him down," he said.
choke
When the governor motioned for him to speak, Paul replied: “I know that for a number of years you have been a judge over this nation; so I gladly make my defense.”
So if God gave them the same gift he gave us who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I to think that I could stand in God’s way?”
To build a house.
You take heed when you are corrected.
look around in all directions as when surprised
Thus the saying ‘One sows and another reaps’ is true.
second item
He traveled through that area, speaking many words of encouragement to the people, and finally arrived in Greece,
Don't play so much outside because you will happen to be in the path of evil spirit(s) which are en route to check out a dead person.
plop down, as a weak child or dizzy adult
We press and rub the sharpening stone against the bolo, axe, or knife in order to sharpen its edge.
hair
But we had to celebrate and be glad, because this brother of yours was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.' "
The whole town gathered at the door,
Jesus said, "If you were blind, you would not be guilty of sin; but now that you claim you can see, your guilt remains.
To escort someone
to be difficult
Then how is it that each of us hears them in our native language?
So the sisters sent word to Jesus, “Lord, the one you love is sick.”
feed a fire
A person who has caught a pig delivers a forkful to each house.
Remember those in prison as if you were their fellow prisoners, and those who are mistreated as if you yourselves were suffering.
Long time ago; a previous time
That's all right because I will just return soon.
Gold
When Jesus had called the Twelve together, he gave them power and authority to drive out all demons and to cure diseases,
If glasses happen to clink together, they will break. They make a tinkling sound.
Cap for a roof
Crossroads.
If anyone considers himself religious and yet does not keep a tight rein on his tongue, he deceives himself and his religion is worthless.
Exceedingly fierce
Festus said: "King Agrippa, and all who are present with us, you see this man! The whole Jewish community has petitioned me about him in Jerusalem and here in Caesarea, shouting that he ought not to live any longer.
Hearing this, Jesus said to Jairus, “Don’t be afraid; just believe, and she will be healed.”
to shake so that water will drip off
The outer side of a house.
Some have in fact already turned away to follow Satan.
strike sparks from flint
He was in the assembly in the wilderness, with the angel who spoke to him on Mount Sinai, and with our ancestors; and he received living words to pass on to us.
Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ himself? Shall I then take the members of Christ and unite them with a prostitute? Never!
kind of red sugarcane
Then Pilate asked him, “Don’t you hear the testimony they are bringing against you?”
Or do you not know that the Lord’s people will judge the world? And if you are to judge the world, are you not competent to judge trivial cases?
Then the devil took him to the holy city and had him stand on the highest point of the temple.
pour out the last drop of liquid from a container.
We will begin to cut the field at the bottom of the field.
A wide grin, grimace, or smile.
From Paphos, Paul and his companions sailed to Perga in Pamphylia, where John left them to return to Jerusalem.
Why is it that I am the one from whom you confiscate a horse for a debt when I have no debt to you?
He said this because they were saying, "He has an evil spirit."
There is something that breaks out [on the body] which itches.
To squirm (like worms)
Gizzard
Leaving the next day, we reached Caesarea and stayed at the house of Philip the evangelist, one of the Seven.
offspring of a dog, weasel, or mongoose
In the case of a will, it is necessary to prove the death of the one who made it,
These things happened to them as examples and were written down as warnings for us, on whom the fulfillment of the ages has come.
but few things are needed—or indeed only one. Mary has chosen what is better, and it will not be taken away from her.”
Don’t stop getting shrimps.
A notch in wood.
The pig trap, the noose trap [for a bird] and the noose trap [for a rat], all of them have a trigger which is that which releases the catch.
a
Isn’t this the carpenter’s son? Isn’t his mother’s name Mary, and aren’t his brothers James, Joseph, Simon and Judas?
My skin has been abrazed.
tired of doing
and is well known for her good deeds, such as bringing up children, showing hospitality, washing the feet of the Lord’s people, helping those in trouble and devoting herself to all kinds of good deeds.
Look squeeze on this papaya, maybe it is ripe.
Both were running, but the other disciple outran Peter and reached the tomb first.
To deviate.
We bumped heads.
but with the precious blood of Christ, a lamb without blemish or defect.
Tall
If the wild pig is here in the middle, the people will surround it as they come out of hiding to attack it.
shake out
Then one of the elders said to me, "Do not weep! See, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has triumphed. He is able to open the scroll and its seven seals."
Wood was what she ordered him to get.
Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground outside your Father’s care.
Beat, whip or hit as with a switch, small stick, belt or rope. Can be a single stroke or several.
I tell you that in the same way there will be more rejoicing in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninetynine righteous persons who do not need to repent.
ladder or step
My uncle is occupied by the building of his house. That is what he pays attention to first.
The one to be born first is the younger sibling because he is put in the lead by the elder sibling.
If you show special attention to the man wearing fine clothes and say, "Here's a good seat for you," but say to the poor man, "You stand there" or "Sit on the floor by my feet,"
When the raft passed through the shallow water, the rattan which was used for holding it together was chewed off and severed by the stones.
Light
An American.
just as
Therefore God again set a certain day, calling it Today, when a long time later he spoke through David, as was said before: "Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts."
When we cross [a river], we detour around the deep [part] and seek out the shallow [area] so that we won't be swept away by the current into the deep pool.
Now, brothers and sisters, I have applied these things to myself and Apollos for your benefit, so that you may learn from us the meaning of the saying, “Do not go beyond what is written.” Then you will not be puffed up in being a follower of one of us over against the other.
Remember the height from which you have fallen! Repent and do the things you did at first. If you do not repent, I will come to you and remove your lampstand from its place.
let out or escape
Kind of climbing bamboo used for weaving.
and all the people came early in the morning to hear him at the temple.
When daylight came, they did not recognize the land, but they saw a bay with a sandy beach, where they decided to run the ship aground if they could.
He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, so that we might die to sins and live for righteousness; by his wounds you have been healed.
If the speech is not finished, we don't know what a person is telling us.
male partner other than husband
“As you sent me into the world, I have sent them into the world.”
penetrate
Across, other side, esp. of water
He included him in the fault. He included those who weren't involved.
that conforms to the gospel concerning the glory of the blessed God, which he entrusted to me.
For I am not ashamed of the gospel, because it is the power of God that brings salvation to everyone who believes: first to the Jew, then to the Gentile.
To be sighted, as with a gun or binoculars.
After the Lord Jesus had spoken to them, he was taken up into heaven and he sat at the right hand of God.
Travel by pair
value
cross over a river or obstacle
He thought to himself, 'What shall I do? I have no place to store my crops.'
The voice spoke to him a second time, “Do not call anything impure that God has made clean.”
For the kingdom of God is not a matter of talk but of power.
Something that is read, such as a book.
kind of rattan
small bird such as a rice bird
Both of them were righteous in the sight of God, observing all the Lord’s commands and decrees blamelessly.
Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You are like whitewashed tombs, which look beautiful on the outside but on the inside are full of the bones of the dead and everything unclean.
Palm heart.
And when the demon was driven out, the man who had been mute spoke. The crowd was amazed and said, “Nothing like this has ever been seen in Israel.”
"How many loaves do you have?" Jesus asked. "Seven," they replied.
I thank God, whom I serve, as my ancestors did, with a clear conscience, as night and day I constantly remember you in my prayers.
If a child gets sick who is always bathing [in the river], the older people say that he afflicted by an evil spirit because he was affected by a long-haired spirit [which lives in the water].
The brightness of a glow is faint.
protest loudly.
To address a little girl
overtake
If there is land which is left over by water which has flooded, that is what has become isolated.
to be slanted or leaning
get well
Therefore, I urge you, brothers and sisters, in view of God’s mercy, to offer your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and pleasing to God—this is your true and proper worship.
hold or carry more than one thing at the same time
reserve or engage
Then the detachment of soldiers with its commander and the Jewish officials arrested Jesus. They bound him
toe
That which erases the footprints is the rain.
Buling twitches in her sleep.
“I pray for them. I am not praying for the world, but for those you have given me, for they are yours.”
When he had called together all the people’s chief priests and teachers of the law, he asked them where the Messiah was to be born.
To decrease
Dear friends, although I was very eager to write to you about the salvation we share, I felt I had to write and urge you to contend for the faith that was once for all entrusted to the saints.
give as a free gift
strong, such as a bow, a spring which cannot be stretched, or the trigger of a pig trap which springs with great force
When I saw her, I was greatly astonished. Then the angel said to me: "Why are you astonished? I will explain to you the mystery of the woman and of the beast she rides, which has the seven heads and ten horns.
kind of bird similar to a robin but walks on the ground
leave early
As for a person who is stepping down to the ground from his house, if he happens to be doing that at the same time a dove calls, he/she will not go ahead with climbing down to the ground.
The crowds answered, “This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth in Galilee.”
He will show you a large upper room, all furnished. Make preparations there."
She is absorbed in her praying so that her good thoughts will continue.
Is not the cup of thanksgiving for which we give thanks a participation in the blood of Christ? And is not the bread that we break a participation in the body of Christ?
By this he meant the Spirit, whom those who believed in him were later to receive. Up to that time the Spirit had not been given, since Jesus had not yet been glorified.
The child is nursing.
be ashamed
She will scold [all] of her companions since they won't obey [her].
But the Lord stood at my side and gave me strength, so that through me the message might be fully proclaimed and all the Gentiles might hear it. And I was delivered from the lion's mouth.
Now there was a man in Jerusalem called Simeon, who was righteous and devout. He was waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was on him.
living situation
Happy, cheerful; at peace within oneself or with others.
To slouch
If anybody thinks he is a prophet or spiritually gifted, let him acknowledge that what I am writing to you is the Lord's command.
To cheep.
As in all the congregations of the saints, women should remain silent in the churches. They are not allowed to speak, but must be in submission, as the Law says.
footprint, handprint, fingerprint, or impression
It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus, who has become for us wisdom from God--that is, our righteousness, holiness and redemption.
But if you harbor bitter envy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not boast about it or deny the truth.
Sugarcane
But those enemies of mine who did not want me to be king over them--bring them here and kill them in front of me.' "
And when the seven thunders spoke, I was about to write; but I heard a voice from heaven say, “Seal up what the seven thunders have said and do not write it down.”
Then he began to call down curses, and he swore to them, “I don’t know the man!” Immediately a rooster crowed.
In our place, we don't show respect to someone unless they have been made a leader.
basket with four to six corners or points
Those who obey his commands live in him, and he in them. And this is how we know that he lives in us: We know it by the Spirit he gave us.
"Simon, Simon, Satan has asked to sift you as wheat.
Flint stone used for starting fire.
give up trying
Poison.
You inform our companions.
in case
There’s a pencil near you
“This is to my Father’s glory, that you bear much fruit, showing yourselves to be my disciples.”
Abraham replied, ‘They have Moses and the Prophets; let them listen to them.’
tease
and to offer a sacrifice in keeping with what is said in the Law of the Lord: “a pair of doves or two young pigeons.”
astringent
But go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy, not sacrifice.’ For I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”
War dance with spear and shield.
All the people were amazed and said to each other, “What words these are! With authority and power he gives orders to impure spirits and they come out!”
The Pharisees, who loved money, heard all this and were sneering at Jesus.
If we are not entangled by sufferings..
When a Samaritan woman came to draw water, Jesus said to her, “Will you give me a drink?”  (His disciples had gone into the town to buy food.)
If our blood is lacking we will be lightheaded when we walk and we won't be able to manage well to get around.
Now he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will also supply and increase your store of seed and will enlarge the harvest of your righteousness.
Your forefathers ate the manna in the desert, yet they died
add rice/meat for guests when lacking
He became hungry and wanted something to eat, and while the meal was being prepared, he fell into a trance.
This man was seized by the Jews and they were about to kill him, but I came with my troops and rescued him, for I had learned that he is a Roman citizen.
He jumped to his feet and began to walk. Then he went with them into the temple courts, walking and jumping, and praising God.
"What did Moses command you?" he replied.
they recognized him as the same man who used to sit begging at the temple gate called Beautiful, and they were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.
Sore ribs, a pain in the side
Then I remembered what the Lord had said: ‘John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.’
Large white bracelets made of hard shell.
But now I am writing you that you must not associate with anyone who calls himself a brother but is sexually immoral or greedy, an idolater or a slanderer, a drunkard or a swindler. With such a man do not even eat
Teach slaves to be subject to their masters in everything, to try to please them, not to talk back to them,
Hex, as a sickness or death brought on by use of a fetish or witchcraft
If you worship me, it will all be yours.”
We point at the dove’s call.
The mixture is buried in the ground for two days before finding it to have become the agkud delicacy.
They shouted, “This is the voice of a god, not of a man.”
To dance, turning from side to side; to be strong-willed or disobedient.
Raft made of wood
These are the twelve he appointed: Simon (to whom he gave the name Peter);
and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you. And surely I am with you always, to the very end of the age.”
Yet I appeal to you on the basis of love. I then, as Paul--an old man and now also a prisoner of Christ Jesus--
and also some women who had been cured of evil spirits and diseases: Mary (called Magdalene) from whom seven demons had come out;
letter
The lamps which just use kerosine, they are easily extinguished by wind.
Then the people asked for a king, and he gave them Saul son of Kish, of the tribe of Benjamin, who ruled forty years.
dance step in which one shuffles his feet
I want to know Christ—yes, to know the power of his resurrection and participation in his sufferings, becoming like him in his death,
They have left the straight way and wandered off to follow the way of Balaam son of Beor, who loved the wages of wickedness.
“If you love me, keep my commands.”
to exert strength
Wherever the first wound was, that is where one will repeat the action of spearing.
In fact, you even put up with anyone who enslaves you or exploits you or takes advantage of you or puts on airs or slaps you in the face.
splinter
large earthworm eaten by wild pigs
Burp
Jesus used this figure of speech, but the Pharisees did not understand what he was telling them.
If a person is talking, he cannot continue talking if another person squelches the one speaking. He is the one who overrides his own speech.
to ask him, “Are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?”
raise eyebrows as a signal
so
yoohoo
A wicked and adulterous generation looks for a sign, but none will be given it except the sign of Jonah.” Jesus then left them and went away.
He’s frustrated because he has no chicken to feed to his visitors.
You were running a good race. Who cut in on you and kept you from obeying the truth?
To play a rhythm on a log, a drum or a can using sticks or one's hands.
So he called to him, ‘Father Abraham, have pity on me and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, because I am in agony in this fire.’
He who descended is the very one who ascended higher than all the heavens, in order to fill the whole universe.)
For through him we both have access to the Father by one Spirit.
pluck
Sporadic
To do something slowly
Immediately he stood up in front of them, took what he had been lying on and went home praising God.
add on
The wife of my daughter (lit. female offspring) is the one who has become my son-in-law.
There in the mountains, amò is what they use amò to address [him]when they call [their] father.
When in labor, the mother strains with much effort.
What if you see the Son of Man ascend to where he was before!
I suffered injury on an errand when I came across a murderer.
Every day I was with you, teaching in the temple courts, and you did not arrest me. But the Scriptures must be fulfilled."
She had a sister called Mary, who sat at the Lord’s feet listening to what he said.
Barnabas wanted to take John, also called Mark, with them,
miss someone
Every valley shall be filled in, every mountain and hill made low. The crooked roads shall become straight, the rough ways smooth.
Skull.
You be the one to choose it.
You have made known to me the paths of life; you will fill me with joy in your presence.’
People were bringing little children to Jesus to have him touch them, but the disciples rebuked them.
"I tell you the truth," Jesus answered, "today--yes, tonight--before the rooster crows twice you yourself will disown me three times."
good character
And what was God’s answer to him? “I have reserved for myself seven thousand who have not bowed the knee to Baal.”
round, curved, whole piece
We do, however, speak a message of wisdom among the mature, but not the wisdom of this age or of the rulers of this age, who are coming to nothing.
Jesus answered, “Truly I tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times.”
be hesitant to do something
view something
find people absent when visiting
So whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do it all for the glory of God.
Grandpa
reject
Let's not digress from our work.
Philip found Nathanael and told him, “We have found the one Moses wrote about in the Law, and about whom the prophets also wrote—Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.”
Tell Archippus: "See to it that you complete the work you have received in the Lord."
A large edible frog.
If we experience swelling which has not yet burst, our lymph nodes here in our groin will hurt.
refuse to turn one’s head when called
To be silent; to cease talking.
To miraculously heal.
Greedy
The sand by the ocean glistens.
It doesn't work to sift something wet because it would stick.
And I heard a sound from heaven like the roar of rushing waters and like a loud peal of thunder. The sound I heard was like that of harpists playing their harps.
sharpen with a knife
?
leave something lying around unprotected.
For some time he refused. But finally he said to himself, ‘Even though I don’t fear God or care what people think,
Your beauty should not come from outward adornment, such as braided hair and the wearing of gold jewelry and fine clothes.
People will tell you, ‘There he is!’ or ‘Here he is!’ Do not go running off after them.
The person who is a warrior is someone who has killed many people.
slip off
to boil a liquid
But to stop this thing from spreading any further among the people, we must warn them to speak no longer to anyone in this name.”
shake food or water from one’s hand.
A person belonging to a particular group
It gave me great joy to have some brothers come and tell about your faithfulness to the truth and how you continue to walk in the truth.
To internalize
Not many of you should presume to be teachers, my brothers, because you know that we who teach will be judged more strictly.
You start off first.
In them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah: ‘You will be ever hearing but never understanding; you will be ever seeing but never perceiving.
steam
rise
A piece
interrupt
Not quite
So Jesus went with them. He was not far from the house when the centurion sent friends to say to him: “Lord, don’t trouble yourself, for I do not deserve to have you come under my roof.
Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Moved by the Spirit, he went into the temple courts. When the parents brought in the child Jesus to do for him what the custom of the Law required,
The foolish ones took their lamps but did not take any oil with them.
sent
They were delighted to hear this and promised to give him money. So he watched for an opportunity to hand him over.
right here
To wave two pieces of material while dancing.
But I tell you, Elijah has already come, and they did not recognize him, but have done to him everything they wished. In the same way the Son of Man is going to suffer at their hands.”
“They will say, ‘The fruit you longed for is gone from you. All your luxury and splendor have vanished, never to be recovered.’
go upriver
So there was great joy in that city.
give a portion
slice
Moses writes this about the righteousness that is by the law: “The person who does these things will live by them.”
But what does it say? “The word is near you; it is in your mouth and in your heart,” that is, the message concerning faith that we proclaim:
faded in color
Tailed creature
lid of a basket or cooking pot
This is how God showed his love among us: He sent his one and only Son into the world that we might live through him.
There was also a prophet, Anna, the daughter of Penuel, of the tribe of Asher. She was very old; she had lived with her husband seven years after her marriage,  and then was a widow until she was eighty-four. She never left the temple but worshiped night and day, fasting and praying.
Boyboy started this magic because we didn’t like what we had to eat.
Dew, moisture
My father said, "Start your motor because I will go first, and you will follow my motorboat wherever I go."
The commander dismissed the young man and cautioned him, "Don't tell anyone that you have reported this to me."
and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut out of the rock. He rolled a big stone in front of the entrance to the tomb and went away.
To become entangled in, as in one's problems or difficulties.
The evil spirit shook the man violently and came out of him with a shriek.
A servant girl saw him seated there in the firelight. She looked closely at him and said, "This man was with him."
and, after looking at himself, goes away and immediately forgets what he looks like.
Help me pound the rice.
extinguish
If anyone tries to harm them, fire comes from their mouths and devours their enemies. This is how anyone who wants to harm them must die.
The membrane encases the white of the egg. And the white of the egg surrounds the yoke.
The master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he is not aware of.
It does not, therefore, depend on human desire or effort, but on God’s mercy.
But you are not to be called ‘Rabbi,’ for you have one Teacher, and you are all brothers.
If a dog sees something he will go after it and catch it.
When Jim took our picture and when it was finished, he gave us our picture.
For he knew who was going to betray him, and that was why he said not everyone was clean.
Light laughter.
heron
Those along the path are the ones who hear, and then the devil comes and takes away the word from their hearts, so that they may not believe and be saved.
The wings are beginning to sprout feathers.
The Samaritan woman said to him, “You are a Jew and I am a Samaritan woman. How can you ask me for a drink?” (For Jews do not associate with Samaritans.)
A house, if it only has glass windows, they are transparent because we can see through to the other side because our view is unobstructed.
The inhabitants of the earth will gloat over them and will celebrate by sending each other gifts, because these two prophets had tormented those who live on the earth.
pray continually,
He did not fail to confess, but confessed freely, “I am not the Messiah.”
to become dry, as weather
“You have heard that it was said, ‘Love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’
Whenever the evil spirits saw him, they fell down before him and cried out, "You are the Son of God."
Place
Foot
an accusation
fold up
After that, there was something that just caused to drop in front of us.
A long curved bolo, esp. one with a wavy blade.
farewell gift given to a guest or relative
This is the verdict: Light has come into the world, but people loved darkness instead of light because their deeds were evil.
swing
She’s screaming on account of the child; it’s about to faint.
"Teacher," they said, "Moses wrote for us that if a man's brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man must marry the widow and have children for his brother.
thunder
To be hindered (by clutter)
And now you know what is holding him back, so that he may be revealed at the proper time.
Someone like Emuel, because they have become Ariola, he is [my] second cousin
She would not give audience to him because she had a lot of work and also [because] she was avoiding  him.
They brought Jesus to the place called Golgotha (which means The Place of the Skull)
The brothers there had heard that we were coming, and they traveled as far as the Forum of Appius and the Three Taverns to meet us. At the sight of these men Paul thanked God and was encouraged.
fasten
If [one is] in Kapugi, the water rises. In respect to trees which replace their leaves, they shed.
Accuse falsely; to express one's assumption that someone to be guilty without evidence.
And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or fields for my sake will receive a hundred times as much and will inherit eternal life.
For prophecy never had its origin in the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit.
They said, "Is this not Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How can he now say, 'I came down from heaven'?"
“Very truly I tell you, no servant is greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him.”
So he got up and went to his father. "But while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and was filled with compassion for him; he ran to his son, threw his arms around him and kissed him.
When we give a warning signal, we pay attention to whether there are people; those are the ones suspected to be raiders stepping on sticks. We say, "rrrrr".
simultaneously
But Elymas the sorcerer (for that is what his name means) opposed them and tried to turn the proconsul from the faith.
Close together
To stand on tiptoe
carabao
When she poured this perfume on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.
Something stored up as valuable to that person; a treasure or a keepsake.
A wave or breaker
But if we say, 'From men'...." (They feared the people, for everyone held that John really was a prophet.)
to a trumpet blast or to such a voice speaking words that those who heard it begged that no further word be spoken to them,
And by that will, we have been made holy through the sacrifice of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
lightheaded
Now John also was baptizing at Aenon near Salim, because there was plenty of water, and people were coming and being baptized.
Once more Pilate came out and said to the Jews gathered there, “Look, I am bringing him out to you to let you know that I find no basis for a charge against him.”
It shone with the glory of God, and its brilliance was like that of a very precious jewel, like a jasper, clear as crystal.
Therefore, as God's chosen people, holy and dearly loved, clothe yourselves with compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness and patience.
He is not here; he has risen, just as he said. Come and see the place where he lay.
Lumpy
I have written you quite boldly on some points, as if to remind you of them again, because of the grace God gave me
“This man,” they charged, “is persuading the people to worship God in ways contrary to the law.”
If we make a waterhole on the beach, we place sand there so that the debris will be filtered out.
chief
He did not let anyone follow him except Peter, James and John the brother of James.
Instead, it should be that of your inner self, the unfading beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is of great worth in God's sight.
Every man who prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head.
Stubborn, disobedient person.
trap for large animals
peel camotes or vegetables
When a monkey scolds a person, he throws a tantrum as he shakes the branch where he lives.
Let us, therefore, make every effort to enter that rest, so that no one will perish by following their example of disobedience.
But in the church I would rather speak five intelligible words to instruct others than ten thousand words in a tongue.
Year
Then he took it down, wrapped it in linen cloth and placed it in a tomb cut in the rock, one in which no one had yet been laid.
Her spirit returned, and at once she stood up. Then Jesus told them to give her something to eat.
Attack
make something like new
Then Paul said to the centurion and the soldiers, "Unless these men stay with the ship, you cannot be saved."
This is the promise our twelve tribes are hoping to see fulfilled as they earnestly serve God day and night. King Agrippa, it is because of this hope that these Jews are accusing me.
Clouds building up
He who belongs to God hears what God says. The reason you do not hear is that you do not belong to God."
Buntit is teaching someone how to weave a basket and she is watching the one she is teaching.
The revelation from Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show his servants what must soon take place. He made it known by sending his angel to his servant John,
Yet they could not find any way to do it, because all the people hung on his words.
But Timothy has just now come to us from you and has brought good news about your faith and love. He has told us that you always have pleasant memories of us and that you long to see us, just as we also long to see you.
During the days of Jesus’ life on earth, he offered up prayers and petitions with fervent cries and tears to the one who could save him from death, and he was heard because of his reverent submission.
It said to the sixth angel who had the trumpet, "Release the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates."
to be self-controlled and pure, to be busy at home, to be kind, and to be subject to their husbands, so that no one will malign the word of God.
They sold property and possessions to give to anyone who had need.
"You see the people crowding against you," his disciples answered, "and yet you can ask, 'Who touched me?' "
An armband used as a charm.
spouse of one's ipag or boyow if that person is not one's own sibling
Does not the potter have the right to make out of the same lump of clay some pottery for special purposes and some for common use?
“You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you so that you might go and bear fruit—fruit that will last—and so that whatever you ask in my name the Father will give you.”
male monkey
There is that which is good to envy, if what our companion is doing is good, that is what we will emulate.
Do not entertain an accusation against an elder unless it is brought by two or three witnesses.
Then the apostles and elders, with the whole church, decided to choose some of their own men and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. They chose Judas (called Barsabbas) and Silas, men who were leaders among the believers.
In Galilee these women had followed him and cared for his needs. Many other women who had come up with him to Jerusalem were also there.
Household knife
Someone gave me a letter. That person whom I knew said, “I'm sending a message please that I will travel upriver to Maambago.”
To become blind
From the tribe of Judah 12,000 were sealed, from the tribe of Reuben 12,000, from the tribe of Gad 12,000,  from the tribe of Asher 12,000, from the tribe of Naphtali 12,000, from the tribe of Manasseh 12,000,  from the tribe of Simeon 12,000, from the tribe of Levi 12,000, from the tribe of Issachar 12,000,  from the tribe of Zebulun 12,000, from the tribe of Joseph 12,000, from the tribe of Benjamin 12,000.
cornsilk
To be kept secret from someone
Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth.
to move something out of the way
live somewhere
because Herod feared John and protected him, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man. When Herod heard John, he was greatly puzzled ; yet he liked to listen to him.
A person nervously moves his foot but he is not itching; he is just moving it for no particular reason.
If the hollowed out portion of the boat [including the edge] is even with the water level (lit. skin of the water), it has sunk just even with the water.
If someone gives the order [for someone] to kill [someone else], he will carry out [the order]
For I am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor demons, neither the present nor the future, nor any powers,
And so I tell you, every kind of sin and slander can be forgiven, but blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven.
Not so with you. Instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,
The house is getting old.
facial hair
I cause my back to bend backwards when I lean back and over against something because my back hurts.
To knead
cut up into small pieces
if he condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah by burning them to ashes, and made them an example of what is going to happen to the ungodly;
peck
Jesus was in the centre of the throng.
But instead, one brother takes another to court—and this in front of unbelievers!
But small is the gate and narrow the road that leads to life, and only a few find it.
Just as man is destined to die once, and after that to face judgment,
If there are many birds of the same variety which are attracted/gathered, we call that pet [bird] a lure which is able to attract its companion.
Dogs run away with meat.
fingers and toes
sea serpent or eel
because the Holy Spirit had not yet come on any of them; they had simply been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
body, whole body
I do not want you to be ignorant of this mystery, brothers, so that you may not be conceited: Israel has experienced a hardening in part until the full number of the Gentiles has come in.
Loudly brag.
You foolish man, do you want evidence that faith without deeds is useless ?
All flesh is not the same: Men have one kind of flesh, animals have another, birds another and fish another
Multiple cloud heads forming
The next day Moses came upon two Israelites who were fighting. He tried to reconcile them by saying, ‘Men, you are brothers; why do you want to hurt each other?’
Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You shut the door of the kingdom of heaven in people’s faces. You yourselves do not enter, nor will you let those enter who are trying to.
To confiscate something
close associate
When Jesus heard this, he said to him, “You still lack one thing. Sell everything you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me.”
We demolish arguments and every pretension that sets itself up against the knowledge of God, and we take captive every thought to make it obedient to Christ.
to cut into strips
He said to them, "How foolish you are, and how slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken!
My dear children, for whom I am again in the pains of childbirth until Christ is formed in you,
Since that time he waits for his enemies to be made his footstool,
With this in mind, we constantly pray for you, that our God may make you worthy of his calling, and that by his power he may bring to fruition your every desire for goodness and your every deed prompted by faith.
Tarsier of Mindanao
That which we step on are the steps.
resentful
nor to devote themselves to myths and endless genealogies. These promote controversies rather than God's work-- which is by faith.
leaves soaked in water for bathing
But the subjects of the kingdom will be thrown outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
Two events, or more, occurring simultaneously
And do not grumble, as some of them did—and were killed by the destroying angel.
"I have come to bring fire on the earth, and how I wish it were already kindled!
And if your foot causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life crippled than to have two feet and be thrown into hell. where " 'their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.'
enter a house when the occupants are eating
Fourth finger or toe.
treat
I may not be a trained speaker, but I do have knowledge. We have made this perfectly clear to you in every way.
If anyone's name was not found written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother, To the church of God in Corinth, together with all his holy people throughout Achaia:
small wooden pole
They enter the traps now because it’s the season for making kaingin.
"But he will reply, 'I don't know you or where you come from. Away from me, all you evildoers!'
will, determination
who gave himself as a ransom for all people. This has now been witnessed to at the proper time.
But as for you, continue in what you have learned and have become convinced of, because you know those from whom you learned it,
You who are trying to be justified by the law have been alienated from Christ; you have fallen away from grace.
If there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “Don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
The chief priests of the Jews protested to Pilate, "Do not write 'The King of the Jews,' but that this man claimed to be king of the Jews."
But when the son of Paul's sister heard of this plot, he went into the barracks and told Paul.
We did this, not because we do not have the right to such help, but in order to offer ourselves as a model for you to imitate.
She who is in Babylon, chosen together with you, sends you her greetings, and so does my son Mark.
To harvest individual plants such as corn or sugarcane by cutting or breaking off the plants.
At harvest time he sent a servant to the tenants to collect from them some of the fruit of the vineyard.
as you help us by your prayers. Then many will give thanks on our behalf for the gracious favor granted us in answer to the prayers of many.
Fine
He did not enter by means of the blood of goats and calves; but he entered the Most Holy Place once for all by his own blood, having obtained eternal redemption.
We are not trying to commend ourselves to you again, but are giving you an opportunity to take pride in us, so that you can answer those who take pride in what is seen rather than in what is in the heart.
Again he asked them, “Who is it you want?” “Jesus of Nazareth,” they said.
At daybreak the council of the elders of the people, both the chief priests and teachers of the law, met together, and Jesus was led before them.
On the first day of the Festival of Unleavened Bread, the disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Where do you want us to make preparations for you to eat the Passover?”
From the time that John was born, God was in his heart because He [God] was the one who determined that John should be born.
Then James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came to him. "Teacher," they said, "we want you to do for us whatever we ask."
We hear that some among you are idle and disruptive. They are not busy; they are busybodies.
female monkey
To spill
strength (physical)
The person who has a reason [to visit] us will go right ahead and tell us what his reason [for coming] is. He won't wait for the person of the house to ask the reason for his coming but he will just go ahead and say what he needs.
Fast, quick
Even after Jesus had done all these miraculous signs in their presence, they still would not believe in him.
He sent two of his helpers, Timothy and Erastus, to Macedonia, while he stayed in the province of Asia a little longer.
"It is one of the Twelve," he replied, "one who dips bread into the bowl with me.
small, non-stinging honey bee.
See that you do not despise one of these little ones. For I tell you that their angels in heaven always see the face of my Father in heaven.
small water bird with a black head, black feathers on its back, a red breast, and a very long bill
sand
But the gift is not like the trespass. For if the many died by the trespass of the one man, how much more did God’s grace and the gift that came by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, overflow to the many!
And what more shall I say? I do not have time to tell about Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David, Samuel and the prophets,
alveolar click
Similarly, encourage the young men to be self-controlled.
The skin of something like a snake which is periodically shed
" 'Well done, my good servant!' his master replied. 'Because you have been trustworthy in a very small matter, take charge of ten cities.'
chip off
Wild animal or fowl
I'll borrow [someone's] land.
There’s the deer now.
It is just as Isaiah said previously: “Unless the Lord Almighty had left us descendants, we would have become like Sodom, we would have been like Gomorrah.”
through whom also he went and preached to the spirits in prison
Scaffolding of a house.
To be very hard
You were invited.
It is enough for students to be like their teachers, and servants like their masters. If the head of the house has been called Beelzebul, how much more the members of his household!
attack
If anyone is ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man will be ashamed of him when he comes in his Father's glory with the holy angels."
greedily and repeatedly stuff one’s mouth with food
“Glory to God in the highest heaven, and on earth peace to those on whom his favor rests.”
Mildewed
leave alone
half
I will recover my knife when my corn is sold.
When the dragon saw that he had been hurled to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child.
As you come to him, the living Stone—rejected by humans but chosen by God and precious to him—
He will be slow to die. He has been given a long life. (lit. The placing of his breath is long.)
poke
The person who is purchasing an axe, he will be slow in looking because the one that is best , [that is the one] he will buy.
Now we pray to God that you will not do anything wrong—not so that people will see that we have stood the test but so that you will do what is right even though we may seem to have failed.
Jesus answered, “How can the guests of the bridegroom mourn while he is with them? The time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; then they will fast.
Show, demonstrate, as to show a person his fault.
A mother hen, when it is afternoon, gathers her offspring under her wings.
From Miletus, Paul sent to Ephesus for the elders of the church.
This is why it is said: “Wake up, sleeper, rise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you.”
connect
No! We believe it is through the grace of our Lord Jesus that we are saved, just as they are.”
It was just soaked briefly.
But since you excel in everything—in faith, in speech, in knowledge, in complete earnestness and in the love we have kindled in you—see that you also excel in this grace of giving.
Our agreement was changed because he forced me to pay [an extra amount].
He then added, “Very truly I tell you, you will see ‘heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending on’ the Son of Man.”
Then the Lord said to him, "Now then, you Pharisees clean the outside of the cup and dish, but inside you are full of greed and wickedness.
The posts of the house have disintegrated because they are rotten.
A small amount; just, simply; please.
do not boast over those branches. If you do, consider this: You do not support the root, but the root supports you.
Is/was here, or there (close by)
Then Annas sent him, still bound, to Caiaphas the high priest.
For from him and through him and to him are all things. To him be the glory forever! Amen.
squashed
From there we traveled to Philippi, a Roman colony and the leading city of that district of Macedonia. And we stayed there several days.
I’ll put the edge on the mat.
and called out in a loud voice, “Jesus, Master, have pity on us!”
When Joseph and Mary had done everything required by the Law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee to their own town of Nazareth.
Coming up to them at that very moment, she gave thanks to God and spoke about the child to all who were looking forward to the redemption of Jerusalem.
the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,
because I hear about your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all the saints.
And this was his message: "After me will come one more powerful than I, the thongs of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and untie.
We are attracted by the pretty design.
They arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail.
Boldly and without hindrance he preached the kingdom of God and taught about the Lord Jesus Christ.
glottalized singing or crying
So when I was sent for, I came without raising any objection. May I ask why you sent for me?”
To go through the motions of waving a chicken before sacrificing it.
Then Jesus said to him, “See that you don’t tell anyone. But go, show yourself to the priest and offer the gift Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.”
"Leave her alone," said Jesus. "Why are you bothering her? She has done a beautiful thing to me.
A mother dog, it plays with its puppy.
Possible
but with good deeds, appropriate for women who profess to worship God.
long, curved knife
To become skinny, such as malnourished plants
They all joined together constantly in prayer, along with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.
The people who were at the pool when their companion was drowning, they were stymied as to what to do in order to rescue [the drowning person]. That is why they were immobilized.
When this had happened, the rest of the sick on the island came and were cured.
But the Lord is faithful, and he will strengthen you and protect you from the evil one.
When your foot almost slipped from the step and you quickly grabbed something, you were almost .....??.... You didn't quite continue to fall from the stairs.
They did what your power and will had decided beforehand should happen.
The two people were racing [each other].
So the man went away and began to tell in the Decapolis how much Jesus had done for him. And all the people were amazed.
expand as a flower; widen as an opening, enlarge, spread, burst forth as sunshine
Some claimed that he was. Others said, “No, he only looks like him.” But he himself insisted, “I am the man.”
After he used [the saw], he loaned it (lit. caused it to be borrowed) again to another person.
But if it is preached that Christ has been raised from the dead, how can some of you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?
When there is a wedding feast, and if there are some who are lacking rice (lit. food), we add to the rice for those who had insufficient.
Jesus, who is called Justus, also sends greetings. These are the only Jews among my fellow workers for the kingdom of God, and they have proved a comfort to me.
female companion
When evening came, they went out of the city.
It was he who gave some to be apostles, some to be prophets, some to be evangelists, and some to be pastors and teachers,
For there is nothing hidden that will not be disclosed, and nothing concealed that will not be known or brought out into the open.
ride
sit or stand with legs spread out
aim one’s fist at the direction from which a dove calls.
All the brothers here send you greetings. Greet one another with a holy kiss.
The cloth will be patched.
vine
Jesus said to them, "If God were your Father, you would love me, for I came from God and now am here. I have not come on my own; but he sent me.
randfather Amasig was the one who was repeatedly telling me that we will be alert because raiders would come.
There was a newly married couple, and when the woman was in the beginning of pregnancy, she strongly craved the mango fruit and so she forced her spouse to get a mango for her. Later, when it was already there, she was no longer hungry for it.
Two women will be grinding with a hand mill; one will be taken and the other left.
So with you: Now is your time of grief, but I will see you again and you will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy
inadvertently caught
If we move to another country, we are just aliens.
chicken fight
Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and from Jesus Christ, the Father's Son, will be with us in truth and love.
Who is going to harm you if you are eager to do good?
But others said, "These are not the sayings of a man possessed by a demon. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?"
End or limit
We miss, are cold, for our companion when it has been a long time since we have seen each other. It means we are lonely.
So, my brothers and sisters, you also died to the law through the body of Christ, that you might belong to another, to him who was raised from the dead, in order that we might bear fruit for God.
Mother has a broken limb.
A small burrow going out from main burrow where an eel keeps its young.
Now it is God who makes both us and you stand firm in Christ. He anointed us,
bolo handle.
This house was completed.
Leaving that place, Jesus withdrew to the region of Tyre and Sidon.
You will say then, "Branches were broken off so that I could be grafted in."
Rotten, mushy, decomposed; to rot, to become crumbly
I gave you milk, not solid food, for you were not yet ready for it. Indeed, you are still not ready.
I charge you before the Lord to have this letter read to all the brothers and sisters.
one Lord, one faith, one baptism;
For this people's heart has become calloused; they hardly hear with their ears, and they have closed their eyes. Otherwise they might see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their hearts and turn, and I would heal them.'
That woman has rolls of fat around her stomach.
thirst
When you have all of your payment [in hand], you can take the horse.
Rapids of a river.
As he went along, he saw a man blind from birth.
When the corn is still unripe, we harvest enough individual plants to cook.
deliverately sway
Green tobacco
I will not speak with you much longer, for the prince of this world is coming. He has no hold on me,
not sticky, well-cooked rice
[Some manuscripts include: But Silas decided to remain there.]
If there is someone whom we capture, we say, “Don’t resist because you are without recourse for you are surrounded.”
The dog is digging because he is relentlessly pursuing a rat there in a hole in the ground.
How great is the love the Father has lavished on us, that we should be called children of God! And that is what we are! The reason the world does not know us is that it did not know him.
Then the church throughout Judea, Galilee and Samaria enjoyed a time of peace and was strengthened. Living in the fear of the Lord and encouraged by the Holy Spirit, it increased in numbers.
He appointed twelve--designating them apostles --that they might be with him and that he might send them out to preach and to have authority to drive out demons.
I don't know.
Moddina’s husband.
a small loosely woven basket of rattan, used for fishing
Just then a woman who had been subject to bleeding for twelve years came up behind him and touched the edge of his cloak.  She said to herself, “If I only touch his cloak, I will be healed.”
Are you greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well and drank from it himself, as did also his sons and his livestock?”
trigger
He took Peter and the two sons of Zebedee along with him, and he began to be sorrowful and troubled.
A kind of red apusow
The seed falling among the thorns refers to someone who hears the word, but the worries of this life and the deceitfulness of wealth choke the word, making it unfruitful.
topple and land on stomach or face
mute
expect
Do not take a purse or bag or sandals; and do not greet anyone on the road.
who killed the Lord Jesus and the prophets and also drove us out. They displease God and are hostile to all men
They requested Festus, as a favor to them, to have Paul transferred to Jerusalem, for they were preparing an ambush to kill him along the way.
An image
taken by surprise
When I kindled a fire with wood that has been ignited with fire, it was ignited and became coals.
just as bad
Month
Then Jesus cried out, "When a man believes in me, he does not believe in me only, but in the one who sent me.
But it was Solomon who built a house for him.
flood over beaches
If we get a thorn in our foot, we will pick it out with a needle so that the thorn will be removed.
for the Holy Spirit will teach you at that time what you should say."
When the sun is at it's zenith, if we walk on the beach which is all sand, when we step [on it], the heat scorches our feet which is like being burned.
To grumble, complain (same as murumuru)
stop over
Completely
Once the crowd realized that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they got into the boats and went to Capernaum in search of Jesus.
Six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus lived, whom Jesus had raised from the dead.
Cheek
baptize
keep as a pet or domesticated animal
Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses saw where he was laid.
To the Jews who had believed him, Jesus said, "If you hold to my teaching, you are really my disciples.
When you sow, you do not plant the body that will be, but just a seed, perhaps of wheat or of something else.
You study the Scriptures diligently because you think that in them you have eternal life. These are the very Scriptures that testify about me,
shout at the thunder and lightning to go away
The meaning was jumbled when there were words which don't fit.
Bamboo shelves of cupboard.
be scattered
The host hurried to meet the guest who arrived at his house and he welcomed and gathered information from him as they talked with one another.
When Pilate saw that he was getting nowhere, but that instead an uproar was starting, he took water and washed his hands in front of the crowd. “I am innocent of this man’s blood,” he said. “It is your responsibility!”
turn
We were not looking for praise from men, not from you or anyone else. As apostles of Christ we could have been a burden to you, but we were gentle among you, like a mother caring for her little children.
spy
Brothers and sisters, I could not address you as people who live by the Spirit but as people who are still worldly—mere infants in Christ.
As for Titus, he is my partner and fellow worker among you; as for our brothers, they are representatives of the churches and an honor to Christ.
A short, fat snake.
For we are God’s handiwork, created in Christ Jesus to do good works, which God prepared in advance for us to do.
and he will reign over Jacob’s descendants forever; his kingdom will never end.”
Joaquin claims the residents of Maambago as his subjects.
And without doubt the lesser person is blessed by the greater.
No matter what I said, my mother would not agree to stay with her other daughter
These are what defile a person; but eating with unwashed hands does not defile them.”
bamboo Jew’s harp
That kind of persuasion does not come from the one who calls you.
David himself, speaking by the Holy Spirit, declared: " 'The Lord said to my Lord: "Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet." '
When the intensity of the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the throbbing pain.
May God himself, the God of peace, sanctify you through and through. May your whole spirit, soul and body be kept blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
I inadvertently stepped on a centepede which immediately latched onto my foot.
If it is an adult who cries to go along [with someone], he will pressure the person [into letting him] come.
snap in two with a sideways motion, as rattan
Adhesive tape
A group of Epicurean and Stoic philosophers began to debate with him. Some of them asked, “What is this babbler trying to say?” Others remarked, “He seems to be advocating foreign gods.” They said this because Paul was preaching the good news about Jesus and the resurrection.
avoid
He replied, “It is not right to take the children’s bread and toss it to the dogs.”
When I internalized or believed in Jesus...
"Consider carefully what you hear," he continued. "With the measure you use, it will be measured to you--and even more
stir or spread around, as drying grain on a mat
We’re hungry for fresh rice but it’s a long time yet before harvest.
The person who speaks on behalf of the man is the spokesman for the discussion.
Yet do not regard them as enemies, but warn them as you would a fellow believer.
[Some manuscripts include: Philip said, “If you believe with all your heart, you may.” The eunuch answered, “I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.”]
“The reason my Father loves me is that I lay down my life—only to take it up again.”
When the sun goes down, it begins to become dark.
If the rain is a lot and then the inside of the boat fills up [with water], it will sink to the brim.
Grace to all who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love.
For the law appoints as high priests men who are weak; but the oath, which came after the law, appointed the Son, who has been made perfect forever.
So even though I wrote to you, it was neither on account of the one who did the wrong nor on account of the injured party, but rather that before God you could see for yourselves how devoted to us you are.
So you have guests after all?
snort
The raiders caught up with him.
Jesus turned and saw her. “Take heart, daughter,” he said, “your faith has healed you.” And the woman was healed from that moment.
have a withered hand or foot.
But if that place is abandoned, it will be quiet; there are no more people and no talking that we can hear.
‘No,’ they replied, ‘there may not be enough for both us and you. Instead, go to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.’
noisy
Polì wood is slow-burning.
good, beautiful, clean, peaceful
There was a person who went bathing and dove headfirst and broke his neck because he hit his head [against something].
great relationship
Although I hope to come to you soon, I am writing you these instructions so that,
Bee’s wax
Some faced jeers and flogging, while still others were chained and put in prison.
If there is a person whom he has met, he will examine his face closely to see if that is really him.
to go hunting with a gun or other weapon
Because there is one loaf, we, who are many, are one body, for we all partake of the one loaf.
On their release, Peter and John went back to their own people and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them.
The crowd spoke up, "We have heard from the Law that the Christ will remain forever, so how can you say, 'The Son 1598 of Man must be lifted up'? Who is this 'Son of Man'?"
Therefore I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer, believe that you have received it, and it will be yours.
Do you have eyes but fail to see, and ears but fail to hear? And don't you remember?
They asked each other, "Were not our hearts burning within us while he talked with us on the road and opened the Scriptures to us?"
It’s bad to marry when still a child.
slim, having a narrow waist
"Then I asked, 'Who are you, Lord?'
But some of them became obstinate; they refused to believe and publicly maligned the Way. So Paul left them. He took the disciples with him and had discussions daily in the lecture hall of Tyrannus.
But when the tenants saw the son, they said to each other, ‘This is the heir. Come, let’s kill him and take his inheritance.’
Many rebuked him and told him to be quiet, but he shouted all the more, "Son of David, have mercy on me!"
Tobacco.
Will you put this on board?
Then go quickly and tell his disciples: ‘He has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see him.’ Now I have told you.”
At the resurrection whose wife will she be, since the seven were married to her?"
By faith the walls of Jericho fell, after the people had marched around them for seven days.
"Teacher," they asked, "when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that they are about to take place?"
For I know your eagerness to help, and I have been boasting about it to the Macedonians, telling them that since last year you in Achaia were ready to give; and your enthusiasm has stirred most of them to action.
A person asked for the tip(s) of the camote [leaves] and he cut off the tip(s) of the red pepper [leaves].
intentionally spread
There is danger not only that our trade will lose its good name, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be discredited, and the goddess herself, who is worshiped throughout the province of Asia and the world, will be robbed of her divine majesty."
“If I testify about myself, my testimony is not true.
"Another said, 'I have just bought five yoke of oxen, and I'm on my way to try them out. Please excuse me.'
and his incomparably great power for us who believe. That power is the same as the mighty strength
Kind of mottled rice
The fire flares up.
patch
Afternoon
He said to them, “How is it then that David, speaking by the Spirit, calls him ‘Lord’? For he says,
When a person has become drunk, he will become sober when he wakes up. He will recover; he won't be drunk.
Then Jesus told his disciples a parable to show them that they should always pray and not give up.
Tiny holes; leaks
This went on for two years, so that all the Jews and Greeks who lived in the province of Asia heard the word of the Lord.
“Men of Galilee,” they said, “why do you stand here looking into the sky? This same Jesus, who has been taken from you into heaven, will come back in the same way you have seen him go into heaven.”
And the God of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory in Christ, after you have suffered a little while, will himself restore you and make you strong, firm and steadfast.
A kind of fish
return the same night
bite by snapping
But he said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness.” Therefore I will boast all the more gladly about my weaknesses, so that Christ’s power may rest on me.
There were some who came to meet us when we arrived at another place.
Stir
This is why it says: “When he ascended on high, he took many captives and gave gifts to his people.”
John’s clothes were made of camel’s hair, and he had a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey.
We’ll break the floor.
cough
pinkish wood used for spears
bathless
big
They called to the mountains and the rocks, "Fall on us and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb!
The man who was healed had no idea who it was, for Jesus had slipped away into the crowd that was there.
This can refer to the supreme God or be used of beings which are believed to be gods.
When we are intensely thirsty, we need to drink some water.
Other seed fell among thorns, which grew up with it and choked the plants.
To pile up in a disorderly fashion brush and logs
Our feet did not touch the cement.
Forgive, be nice to each other
in advance
food, especially staple food like rice or camote
I tell you the truth, unless a kernel of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it remains only a single seed. But if it dies, it produces many seeds.
Paul, a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ to further the faith of God’s elect and their knowledge of the truth that leads to godliness—
to split or open up as a log
he has fulfilled for us, their children, by raising up Jesus. As it is written in the second Psalm: ‘You are my son; today I have become your father.’
shave off hair or feathers using a knife, razor, or sharp object
If he cries to go along, he wants to go with his mother.
warning
Bank of river; beach
To bring some part of one’s body above the surface of the water as a snake with only its head above the water
plunder
I urge you, brothers, to watch out for those who cause divisions and put 1699 obstacles in your way that are contrary to the teaching you have learned. Keep away from them.
Temporary shelter
saying, 'This fellow began to build and was not able to finish.'
You go to the festival. I am not going up to this festival, because my time has not yet fully come."
Now Thomas (called Didymus), one of the Twelve, was not with the disciples when Jesus came.
And Mary said: “My soul glorifies the Lord
move in a circular path
rap with knuckles
Every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices, and so it was necessary for this one also to have something to offer.
For in him we live and move and have our being.' As some of your own poets have said, 'We are his offspring.'
to cut wedges or chips out of something
gouge out a hole in something, as coconut meat from a shell or fish eyes
“You have heard that it was said, ‘Eye for eye, and tooth for tooth.’
“Lord, if it’s you,” Peter replied, “tell me to come to you on the water.”
Generous.
Second; day after tomorrow
When he inquired as to the time when his son got better, they said to him, “Yesterday, at one in the afternoon, the fever left him.”
Now Jesus was going up to Jerusalem. On the way, he took the Twelve aside and said to them,
But when you enter a town and are not welcomed, go into its streets and say,
“Now when David had served God’s purpose in his own generation, he fell asleep; he was buried with his ancestors and his body decayed.
As for the sight of my eyes, I cannot see clearly.
Possessed by evil spirit
"Whoever welcomes one of these little children in my name welcomes me; and whoever welcomes me does not welcome me but the one who sent me."
and went up to him again and again, saying, “Hail, king of the Jews!” And they slapped him in the face.
I did not go up to Jerusalem to see those who were apostles before I was, but I went into Arabia. Later I returned to Damascus.
Then Agrippa said to Festus, "I would like to hear this man myself." He replied, "Tomorrow you will hear him."
We will follow the footprints in whatever direction towards which they are pointed.
boy
I put this in human terms because you are weak in your natural selves. Just as you used to offer the parts of your body in slavery to impurity and to everincreasing wickedness, so now offer them in slavery to righteousness leading to holiness.
To become familiar with someone as a friend; to find out about something.
On hearing of this, John's disciples came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.
Then they went home and prepared spices and perfumes. But they rested on the Sabbath in obedience to the commandment.
" 'I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting,' the Lord replied. 'Now get up and stand on your feet. I have appeared to you to appoint you as a servant and as a witness of what you have seen of me and what I will show you.
To find or locate.
outsider
sound of water splashing
underlyingly
If there are children who are eating and there is a lot of rice which falls to the floor, they are wasting the food.
The man without the Spirit does not accept the things that come from the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, and he cannot understand them, because they are spiritually discerned.
All Scripture is God-breathed and is useful for teaching, rebuking, correcting and training in righteousness,
“Yes, he does,” he replied. When Peter came into the house, Jesus was the first to speak. “What do you think, Simon?” he asked. “From whom do the kings of the earth collect duty and taxes—from their own children or from others?”
but they were kept from recognizing him.
While he was blessing them, he left them and was taken up into heaven.
The male-teacher and female teacher(s), they are the teachers of the students.
made us alive with Christ even when we were dead in transgressions—it is by grace you have been saved.
If it could, would they not have stopped being offered? For the worshipers would have been cleansed once for all, and would no longer have felt guilty for their sins.
Do your best to get here before winter. Eubulus greets you, and so do Pudens, Linus, Claudia and all the brothers.
She’s clapping her hands.
I speak to sensible people; judge for yourselves what I say.
Do not love the world or anything in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
But they did not understand what he was saying to them.
These people are not drunk, as you suppose. It’s only nine in the morning!
Jesus said to them, “Come and have breakfast.” None of the disciples dared ask him, “Who are you?” They knew it was the Lord.
A person who has chills feels cold because they have malaria.
To shred abaca
Lean on something with one's chest.
We have not received the spirit of the world but the Spirit who is from God, that we may understand what God has freely given us.
To be struck, as by light.
All have turned away, they have together become worthless; there is no one who does good, not even one.”
If we have a sore in our mouth, we will hold water in our mouth which contains salt.
And where these have been forgiven, there is no longer any sacrifice for sin.
The person who is making preparations to cut [his field] and has gotten six people as tomorrow he will carry out [his plan] to have [his field] cut
Then the angel said to me, "The waters you saw, where the prostitute sits, are peoples, multitudes, nations and languages.
cover a heaping pot of camote
Consider it pure joy, my brothers and sisters, whenever you face trials of many kinds,
catch up
Then after three years, I went up to Jerusalem to get acquainted with Cephas and stayed with him fifteen days.
Once safely on shore, we found out that the island was called Malta.
The high priest carries the blood of animals into the Most Holy Place as a sin offering, but the bodies are burned outside the camp.
As the soldiers were about to take Paul into the barracks, he asked the commander, "May I say something to you?"
bridge
Then ‘a new king, to whom Joseph meant nothing, came to power in Egypt.’
Wood used in making a hearth frame.
Jesus called them together and said, “You know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their high officials exercise authority over them.
stop
And while they still did not believe it because of joy and amazement, he asked them, "Do you have anything here to eat?"
For I did not speak of my own accord, but the Father who sent me commanded me what to say and how to say it.
When he had gone indoors, the blind men came to him, and he asked them, “Do you believe that I am able to do this?” “Yes, Lord,” they replied.
Or do you show contempt for the riches of his kindness, forbearance and patience, not realizing that God’s kindness is intended to lead you to repentance?
weep
He must hold firmly to the trustworthy message as it has been taught, so that he can encourage others by sound doctrine and refute those who oppose it.
What is she paying you?
To exclaim
will not the ministry of the Spirit be even more glorious?
The Pharisees and Sadducees came to Jesus and tested him by asking him to show them a sign from heaven.
leg
Get out!
I hook them onto the basket rim
The fin by the fish's ear is what determines the movement of the body of that fish.
Hmm, so what then should we use for medicine?
Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Have I not seen Jesus our Lord? Are you not the result of my work in the Lord?
“You’re out of your mind,” they told her. When she kept insisting that it was so, they said, “It must be his angel.”
disappear
And so Jesus also suffered outside the city gate to make the people holy through his own blood.
"But his subjects hated him and sent a delegation after him to say, 'We don't want this man to be our king.'
whose
Help each other
They couldn’t share with us
To shed leaves, as trees
Paul looked straight at the Sanhedrin and said, “My brothers, I have fulfilled my duty to God in all good conscience to this day.”
eat, sleep, or sit on the bare floor
He was delivered over to death for our sins and was raised to life for our justification.
Our people must learn to devote themselves to doing what is good, in order that they may provide for daily necessities and not live unproductive lives.
Woe to the world because of the things that cause people to stumble! Such things must come, but woe to the person through whom they come!
I will make those who are of the synagogue of Satan, who claim to be Jews though they are not, but are liars--I will make them come and fall down at your feet and acknowledge that I have loved you.
very big
Go rather to the lost sheep of Israel.
have a war
But the chief priests and Pharisees had given orders that if anyone found out where Jesus was, he should report it so that they might arrest him.
grow fast
for kings and all those in authority, that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness.
Reinforcing ties
Therefore rejoice, you heavens and you who dwell in them! But woe to the earth and the sea, because the devil has gone down to you! He is filled with fury, because he knows that his time is short.”
Vomit
and Jesus was in the temple area walking in Solomon's Colonnade.
The Jews pushed Alexander to the front, and some of the crowd shouted instructions to him. He motioned for silence in order to make a defense before the people.
cuddly, as a baby
bark of a tree
The opening between the wall and the roof of a house.
express agreement; empathize
stick or bar used in weaving
When this became known to the Jews and Greeks living in Ephesus, they were all seized with fear, and the name of the Lord Jesus was held in high honor.
And he says in another place, “You are a priest forever, in the order of Melchizedek.”
A kind of fish.
Then they asked him, "What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?"
Peter turned and saw that the disciple whom Jesus loved was following them. (This was the one who had leaned back against Jesus at the supper and had said, “Lord, who is going to betray you?”)
Now for the matters you wrote about: It is good for a man not to marry.
All these people were still living by faith when they died. They did not receive the things promised; they only saw them and welcomed them from a distance. And they admitted that they were aliens and strangers on earth.
He will continuously discuss it with the father of the girl until he agrees.
"I tell you the truth, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
sun (poetic)
He told us how he had seen an angel appear in his house and say, ‘Send to Joppa for Simon who is called Peter.
bark at
To band with metal; gold or brass trim, such as on spear
because of your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now,
knotted rattan used as a calendar or appointment reminder
He will stop by and pick up
strip
She’s sassing me.
Those in Sulit, Langilan, Banuwaloy, Kapugi, and Pipisan, that is the word they use.
person’s chest.
rush
We are experiencing good things.
I pray that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened in order that you may know the hope to which he has called you, the riches of his glorious inheritance in his holy people,
hook onto
Aware that his disciples were grumbling about this, Jesus said to them, "Does this offend you?
rough, harsh
And the gospel must first be preached to all nations.
The colt t[ries to] shake off [the rope] if it is tethered.
“I have set you an example that you should do as I have done for you.”
But she had her extra finger here.
will take your horse ahead of time and then the next day you will just go to my house and inquire whether I have something to use for payment.
As I watched, I heard an eagle that was flying in midair call out in a loud voice: "Woe! Woe! Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, because of the trumpet blasts about to be sounded by the other three angels!"
Planting stick; to poke or plant a stick firmly in the ground.
time of year to start a new field (March)
A person who is walking, he/she continually walks vigorously.
traumatized or immobilized,
always learning but never able to come to a knowledge of the truth.
explosive used for killing fish.
Jesus answered him, "I tell you the truth, today you will be with me in paradise."
cover
Of you
was caught up to paradise and heard inexpressible things, things that no one is permitted to tell.
And this is the testimony: God has given us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
When the uproar had ended, Paul sent for the disciples and, after encouraging them, said goodbye and set out for Macedonia.
Esophagus
The kabugkul hawk/eagle is greedy for chicks.
We are afraid that the child will rock forward and will fall head over heels.
and asked them, “Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?” They answered, “No, we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.”
to open up as a book
Then he said to them: "Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
And when he had taken it, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb. Each one had a harp and they were holding golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.
Therefore he is able to save completely those who come to God through him, because he always lives to intercede for them.
Then it says, ‘I will return to the house I left.’ When it arrives, it finds the house unoccupied, swept clean and put in order.
Meanwhile we groan, longing to be clothed instead with our heavenly dwelling,
If there is a child who was born outside the village who is [deliberately] left behind by the mother, it has been abandoned by her.
A wild cat naturally lives in the forest.
You say, “Food for the stomach and the stomach for food, and God will destroy them both.” The body, however, is not meant for sexual immorality but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body.
bow and arrow set.
Paul greeted them and reported in detail what God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry.
Very old
Don’t eat from the same leaf; eat separately.
file (tool)
About midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the other prisoners were listening to them.
circumcize
If anyone does not provide for his relatives, and especially for his immediate family, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever
Peter replied, “Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins. And you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
tassel or blossom
To envelop, wrap around (diaper, bandage)
that the rest of mankind may seek the Lord, even all the Gentiles who bear my name, says the Lord, who does these things’—
The red rat was changed from a red flying squirrel.
to fold leaves of certain rattan and palm leaves when preparing leaves for roofing so that they all hang in the same direction
swim on one’s back
Let some of your leaders come with me, and if the man has done anything wrong, they can press charges against him there.”
Buliung will pole the raft with the old one.
Do not deprive each other except perhaps by mutual consent and for a time, so that you may devote yourselves to prayer. Then come together again so that Satan will not tempt you because of your lack of self-control.
No one, then, should refuse to accept him. Send him on his way in peace so that he may return to me. I am expecting him along with the brothers.
I've become tired of your conduct of habitual drinking.
The other Jews joined him in his hypocrisy, so that by their hypocrisy even Barnabas was led astray.
And I know that this man—whether in the body or apart from the body I do not know, but God knows—
Just think how great he was: Even the patriarch Abraham gave him a tenth of the plunder!
“Come,” he said. Then Peter got down out of the boat, walked on the water and came toward Jesus.
The Jewish Passover Feast was near.
And here is my judgment about what is best for you in this matter. Last year you were the first not only to give but also to have the desire to do so.
The sun will set.
"But before all this, they will lay hands on you and persecute you. They will deliver you to synagogues and prisons, and you will be brought before kings and governors, and all on account of my name.
In the same way your Father in heaven is not willing that any of these little ones should perish.
Every high priest is selected from among the people and is appointed to represent the people in matters related to God, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
run away
develop
the base of a mountain where the incline begins
When the boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
[Some manuscripts include: “However, this kind does not go out except by prayer and fasting.”]
Give us each day our daily bread.
For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon.’
but
For those who sleep, sleep at night, and those who get drunk, get drunk at night.
It is God’s will that you should be sanctified: that you should avoid sexual immorality;
And then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will overthrow with the breath of his mouth and destroy by the splendor of his coming.
When he heard this, Jesus said, “This sickness will not end in death. No, it is for God’s glory so that God’s Son may be glorified through it.”
handspan
He who hates me hates my Father as well.
Nothing outside a man can make him 'unclean' by going into him. Rather, it is what comes out of a man that makes him 'unclean.' "
Get rid of the old yeast, so that you may be a new unleavened batch—as you really are. For Christ, our Passover lamb, has been sacrificed.
To transfer
Garlic
sound of an airplane or bamboo
The wasps were disturbed by having water poured on them and then Elena was stung.
To be slow to do something
Person with worms; Wormy.
These were all commended for their faith, yet none of them received what had been promised.
They all wept as they embraced him and kissed him.
After this I saw another angel coming down from heaven. He had great authority, and the earth was illuminated by his splendor.
use up all of something
The black thunderheads, if they become white, they will cause it to rain hard.
To obstruct
This is the message you heard from the beginning: We should love one another.
If we send someone to buy salt then he will come back without delay. After he makes the purchase, he will turn around and come right back.
he fled naked, leaving his garment behind.
inadvertently offend someone
Indeed
He did not say this on his own, but as high priest that year he prophesied that Jesus would die for the Jewish nation,
The material has been put in order.
To pant
So the soldiers, carrying out their orders, took Paul with them during the night and brought him as far as Antipatris.
"Listen! A farmer went out to sow his seed.
to pass the long way around, detour
And there were shepherds living out in the fields nearby, keeping watch over their flocks at night.
large pox
The one who comes from above is above all; the one who is from the earth belongs to the earth, and speaks as one from the earth. The one who comes from heaven is above all.
for, "The earth is the Lord's, and everything in it."
The rattan fruit is astringent when we chew it.
Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of Zebedee’s sons.
forgive
When we pick food from our teeth, we remove that which is dirty from our teeth
Has not Moses given you the law? Yet not one of you keeps the law. Why are you trying to kill me?"
Partial damming of river to trap fish
When this man heard that Jesus had arrived in Galilee from Judea, he went to him and begged him to come and heal his son, who was close to death.
The woman pressed the head of the mudfish to break its neck and so it died.
hen we were still children, we played with each other long ago and we said, “Let's make make-believe rats, and so we will strike the upper arms of our companions.”
To be inadvertently pulled up or plucked out
His emotions (lit breath) were disturbed by those who were just making [false] accusations. We were taken by surprise because we had not been asked [about it].
And the child grew and became strong in spirit; and he lived in the wilderness until he appeared publicly to Israel.
It’s your own fault
If we have a guest, those in another house hurry over to meet them and find out [about them].
establish
doubt
encircle
Preach the word; be prepared in season and out of season; correct, rebuke and encourage—with great patience and careful instruction.
while evil men and impostors will go from bad to worse, deceiving and being deceived.
If one is intercepted, you are blocked when you pass by way of the raiders.
“I am the Lord’s servant,” Mary answered. “May your word to me be fulfilled.” Then the angel left her.
His mercy extends to those who fear him, from generation to generation.
mix
To change one thing into something else
She did what she could. She poured perfume on my body beforehand to prepare for my burial.
Jesus replied, “Foxes have dens and birds have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head.”
fall
give something for free
Don't grab and pull on my dress because it will tear.
To quit
The albino antabun heron has no mixture of design because it is completely white.
lounge
and you are of Christ, and Christ is of God.
to intersect
The manipulation of a baby's position before and during the birthing process.
go downriver, especially on a raft
And that is what some of you were. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and by the Spirit of our God.
follow the very same path as another
When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Need
He stood beside me and said, 'Brother Saul, receive your sight!' And at that very moment I was able to see him.
kind of bat
Now then, why do you try to test God by putting on the necks of Gentiles a yoke that neither we nor our ancestors have been able to bear?
When the plane landed and the people helped deliver your things to the house, they took them all the way to the house. They took them directly upstairs. This is considered an act of service for which there is no charge.
God, whom I serve in my spirit in preaching the gospel of his Son, is my witness how constantly I remember you
tiny bird
In those days when the number of disciples was increasing, the Hellenistic Jews among them complained against the Hebraic Jews because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution of food.
type of monkey trap with loops
Afterward Jesus appeared in a different form to two of them while they were walking in the country.
So do not be afraid of them, for there is nothing concealed that will not be disclosed, or hidden that will not be made known.
We don't have anything to loan because [we just have enough] left for one meal.
Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
A tightly woven tapered backpack
To be alert, prepare for attack.
As for people, they have eyes when they are born.
This service that you perform is not only supplying the needs of God's people but is also overflowing in many expressions of thanks to God.
bother
dam up
chew and suck on
hen we strike and then a welt forms on the skin, and that has become the rat which climbed up his arm. That is the rat game.
(He did not know what to say, they were so frightened.)
Even if we’re reached by murderers, nevermind because we’ll just endure it.
Was not our ancestor Abraham considered righteous for what he did when he offered his son Isaac on the altar?
He will bring back many of the people of Israel to the Lord their God.
So they brought him. When the spirit saw Jesus, it immediately threw the boy into a convulsion. He fell to the ground and rolled around, foaming at the mouth.
From Perga they went on to Pisidian Antioch. On the Sabbath they entered the synagogue and sat down.
I turned around to see the voice that was speaking to me. And when I turned I saw seven golden lampstands,
filthy
That talk didn’t hit the mark.
You will be betrayed even by parents, brothers, relatives and friends, and they will put some of you to death.
The cat pounced on a green lizard upon which it was preying as it likewise was preying on a cochroach.
Whose house?
female pig
“about righteousness, because I am going to the Father, where you can see me no longer;”
Bang (as of a gun)
By faith the prostitute Rahab, because she welcomed the spies, was not killed with those who were disobedient.
At that [time] when I returned from Davao when my head had been operated on, we planted rice.
The cans were used as shingles
To make several purchase transactions
Or these who are here should state what crime they found in me when I stood before the Sanhedrin--
clay pot
A kind of white sugarcane that has soft, easy to chew pith.
be upset
Therefore encourage one another and build each other up, just as in fact you are doing.
To discern flavor.
To scrape
Now this is our boast: Our conscience testifies that we have conducted ourselves in the world, and especially in our relations with you, in the holiness and sincerity that are from God. We have done so not according to worldly wisdom but according to God's grace.
All of us who are mature should take such a view of things. And if on some point you think differently, that too God will make clear to you.
small ant
become flavorless
When it is already afternoon [about] three o’clock, the sun becomes obscured and the thunder clouds become dark.
And if I do what I do not want to do, I agree that the law is good.
Admonishing word to a coughing child
“Now this is eternal life: that they know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent.”
to pick a tree to cut down the fruit
Those who were about to question him withdrew immediately. The commander himself was alarmed when he realized that he had put Paul, a Roman citizen, in chains.
As soon as it was night, the believers sent Paul and Silas away to Berea. On arriving there, they went to the Jewish synagogue.
When we are buying something, we look at it carefully.
You know that when you were pagans, somehow or other you were influenced and led astray to mute idols.
On the first day of every week, each one of you should set aside a sum of money in keeping with your income, saving it up, so that when I come no collections will have to be made.
mildew
Then I heard a loud voice from the temple saying to the seven angels, “Go, pour out the seven bowls of God’s wrath on the earth.”
The brightness causes it to rain.
Nickname
and not only by his coming but also by the comfort you had given him. He told us about your longing for me, your deep sorrow, your ardent concern for me, so that my joy was greater than ever.
and if he rescued Lot, a righteous man, who was distressed by the filthy lives of lawless men
Five of them were foolish and five were wise.
And anyone who swears by the temple swears by it and by the one who dwells in it.
If not, what did you go out to see? A man dressed in fine clothes? No, those who wear expensive clothes and indulge in luxury are in palaces.
The rodent that lives here in the house do not make a mound living quarters because they make a nest in the house.
The teachers of the law and the Pharisees sit in Moses’ seat.
A kind of sugarcane.
Wake up! Strengthen what remains and is about to die, for I have found your deeds unfinished in the sight of my God.
Then they offered him wine mixed with myrrh, but he did not take it.
When the sawog fish comes next to us, it comes into our clear view.
All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had said through the prophet:
As for advice, it is one kind of teaching and correction for bad conduct.
An instrument used in weaving made of wood and pointed on both ends, used in weaving.
Belly
He replied, “Because the knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of heaven has been given to you, but not to them.
give orders
When this had dawned on him, he went to the house of Mary the mother of John, also called Mark, where many people had gathered and were praying.
sift
When the disciples James and John saw this, they asked, "Lord, do you want 1531 us to call fire down from heaven to destroy them ?"
You have no part or share in this ministry, because your heart is not right before God.
The crowd rebuked them and told them to be quiet, but they shouted all the louder, “Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us!”
sprout
Then Jesus told them, “This very night you will all fall away on account of me, for it is written: ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’
But since they have no root, they last only a short time. When trouble or persecution comes because of the word, they quickly fall away.
So Joseph also went up from the town of Nazareth in Galilee to Judea, to Bethlehem the town of David, because he belonged to the house and line of David.
For many to throw something at one another.
and said, 'Do not be afraid, Paul. You must stand trial before Caesar; and God has graciously given you the lives of all who sail with you.'
fret of an instrument
Therefore, among God’s churches we boast about your perseverance and faith in all the persecutions and trials you are enduring.
While he was still speaking, a bright cloud covered them, and a voice from the cloud said, “This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased. Listen to him!”
I am not seeking glory for myself; but there is one who seeks it, and he is the judge.
repeat the speech or words of someone.
Then the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared to sound them.
if he did not spare the ancient world when he brought the flood on its ungodly people, but protected Noah, a preacher of righteousness, and seven others;
Fast
Regarding if we have a friend with whom we had a good relationship (lit. our accompanying was good) but then if someone sings his song about God but he is no longer here on the earth, loneliness/grief will be triggered in you when you hear that song [which he sang] when he was still alive.
He said to me: “It is done. I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End. To the thirsty I will give water without cost from the spring of the water of life.
silt
The tongue also is a fire, a world of evil among the parts of the body. It corrupts the whole person, sets the whole course of his life on fire, and is itself set on fire by hell.
Take refuge
At that point some of the people of Jerusalem began to ask, "Isn't this the man they are trying to kill?
break a cooking pot (applies only to a certain type of soft firewood)
large water leech
When it had been a long time and he was repeatedly stealing, it became known by the people that it was true that he was the one who had taken
When Barnabas and Saul had finished their mission, they returned from Jerusalem, taking with them John, also called Mark.
Be on guard! Be alert ! You do not know when that time will come.
Brideprice
And I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
A kind of tree the leaves
As for my daughter Jeany who fell from a santol tree, she involuntarily cried out because the throbbing pain hurt excessively.
A kind of vine, the sap of which is used to stimulate hair growth
While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, “Set apart for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them.”
What then? Shall we sin because we are not under the law but under grace? By no means!
gentleness and self-control. Against such things there is no law.
Whoever has will be given more, and they will have an abundance. Whoever does not have, even what they have will be taken from them.
eyes have white spots/cataracts
A torch
Kind of taro with white stalks
Even though you should happen to choose, yet if  requested is excessive, you will be unable to get it.
Painful, cracked feet from soaking in water
For we wanted to come to you-- certainly I, Paul, did, again and again-- but Satan stopped us.
slip inadvertently
To pay immediately upon request
They call the spouse of his/her sibling iras.
I baptize you with water, but he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit."
Even while the boy was coming, the demon threw him to the ground in a convulsion. But Jesus rebuked the impure spirit, healed the boy and gave him back to his father.
chicken’s comb
Accept him whose faith is weak, without passing judgment on disputable matters.
Show proper respect to everyone: Love the brotherhood of believers, fear God, honor the king.
Brothers and sisters, each person, as responsible to God, should remain in the situation they were in when God called them.
However, each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.
“You call me ‘Teacher’ and ‘Lord,’ and rightly so, for that is what I am.”
"Abba, Father," he said, "everything is possible for you. Take this cup from me. Yet not what I will, but what you will."
Brothers and sisters, let me take an example from everyday life. Just as no one can set aside or add to a human covenant that has been duly established, so it is in this case.
Each of the four living creatures had six wings and was covered with eyes all around, even under his wings. Day and night they never stop saying: "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, who was, and is, and is to come."
These things happened so that the scripture would be fulfilled: "Not one of his bones will be broken,"
head covering
take effect, as a medicine
After taking the cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among you.
and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images made to look like a mortal human being and birds and animals and reptiles.
Immediately, because Herod did not give praise to God, an angel of the Lord struck him down, and he was eaten by worms and died.
Some people follow a creek when they travel and go uphill when they go to the mountains.
To happen to clink together making a clanging or clinking sound
But Christ has indeed been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep.
To make.
monkey
Then the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, “It is the Lord!” As soon as Simon Peter heard him say, “It is the Lord,” he wrapped his outer garment around him (for he had taken it off) and jumped into the water.
and then the third married her, and in the same way the seven died, leaving no children.
Palm heart
If someone has an infected sore, he will peel off some tobacco and apply it to the sore to keep off the flies.
We enter into the one singing a love song. We encourage them by saying, “Continue singing love songs.” By that means, we are entering into our mutual joy.
So he got up, took the child and his mother during the night and left for Egypt,
Get rid of all bitterness, rage and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice.
dry season
to shake, as a house during an earthquake
feel upset, hurt, sad, or angry
attraction
very far away
Large, huge
And when you pray, do not be like the hypocrites, for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and on the street corners to be seen by others. Truly I tell you, they have received their reward in full.
to be taut, tightened
But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning in Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. Having been warned in a dream, he withdrew to the district of Galilee,
shelf, contradict
for all of you who were baptized into Christ have clothed yourselves with Christ.
the son of Amminadab, the son of Ram, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
If one trembles, he shivers because he has been entered by his familiar spirit.
reciprocate an exchange of a brideprice
run swiftly, gallop
The person who is speaking and does not laugh, he is emphasizing the words of whatever his news is.
He said to them, "Go into all the world and preach the good news to all creation.
“And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another advocate to help you and be with you forever—”
tiny bell
Masticate it well so that it will disintegrate; continually chew it so that you can swallow it.
Since they were spending many days there, Festus discussed Paul's case with the king. He said: "There is a man here whom Felix left as a prisoner.
Even though we warned [that person] not to go to his field to fetch something for them to eat because there was a strong warning, he went anyway and was hit by the raiders. He was shot.
So they took him and killed him, and threw him out of the vineyard.
have mouth open to be feed,
sow seed by casting
Kind of bird weighing around 3 kilos
The Pharisees heard the crowd whispering such things about him. Then the chief priests and the Pharisees sent temple guards to arrest him.
But they could not stand up against the wisdom the Spirit gave him as he spoke.
trust
an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of little children, because you have in the law the embodiment of knowledge and truth—
Buntit has a lot of clothing.
Shoulder bone or joint
And so after waiting patiently, Abraham received what was promised.
If someone shivers, they begin to have chills.
Our foot is lifted up as we take a step and then we step down.
thicken, as rice gruel
Large crowds from Galilee, the Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea and the region across the Jordan followed him.
Brothers, think of what you were when you were called. Not many of you were wise by human standards; not many were influential; not many were of noble birth
To chase
break off spontaneously
balance
And the Father who sent me has himself testified concerning me. You have never heard his voice nor seen his form,
This is how we know who the children of God are and who the children of the devil are: Anyone who does not do what is right is not a child of God; nor is anyone who does not love his brother.
If you build a fire and blow on it, you will get smoke in your eyes and they start smarting.
snatch quickly
go away for a period to allow for choice
He also saw a poor widow put in two very small copper coins.
If the disease of measles comes to some place, [and] if someone comes for a visit from that place, the disease will be transmitted to us.
When she and the members of her household were baptized, she invited us to her home. “If you consider me a believer in the Lord,” she said, “come and stay at my house.” And she persuaded us.
Then the whole town went out to meet Jesus. And when they saw him, they pleaded with him to leave their region.
One person considers one day more sacred than another; another considers every day alike. Each of them should be fully convinced in their own mind.
filmy skin covering corn, beans, eggs, or organs
because anyone who has died has been set free from sin.
We are not like Moses, who would put a veil over his face to prevent the Israelites from seeing the end of what was passing away.
I also want the women to dress modestly, with decency and propriety, adorning themselves, not with elaborate hairstyles or gold or pearls or expensive clothes,
I slept by myself.
Two men will be in the field; one will be taken and the other left.
It is impossible for those who have once been enlightened, who have tasted the heavenly gift, who have shared in the Holy Spirit, who have tasted the goodness of the word of God and the powers of the coming age, if they fall away, to be brought back to repentance, because to their loss they are crucifying the Son of God all over again and subjecting him to public disgrace.
dishevelled, as cord or thread
digress
My goodness that you have been traveling in the sun when it is excessively hot.
Are we beginning to commend ourselves again? Or do we need, like some people, letters of recommendation to you or from you?
"Then he said: 'The God of our fathers has chosen you to know his will and to see the Righteous One and to hear words from his mouth.
I will make a storage shelter for corn.
while our presentable parts need no special treatment. But God has combined the members of the body and has given greater honor to the parts that lacked it,
Some people are slow to get out of breath when he/she swims underwater and touches the bottom of a deep pool.
plain black cloth (used for blouses)
and asked, “Where is the one who has been born king of the Jews? We saw his star when it rose and have come to worship him.”
The assembly was in confusion: Some were shouting one thing, some another. Most of the people did not even know why they were there.
And he brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at him and said, “You are Simon son of John. You will be called Cephas” (which, when translated, is Peter).
relate
When there was someone who killed a family, the raiders massacred them and everyone died.
This testimony is true. Therefore, rebuke them sharply, so that they will be sound in the faith
For it is by grace you have been saved, through faith—and this is not from yourselves, it is the gift of God—
But understand this: If the owner of the house had known at what hour the thief was coming, he would not have let his house be broken into.
Jesus came, took the bread and gave it to them, and did the same with the fish.
Whoever has my commands and obeys them, he is the one who loves me. He who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I too will love him and show myself to him."
When we look in a mirror, we see our reflection.
pierce
Then all the people of the region of the Gerasenes asked Jesus to leave them, because they were overcome with fear. So he got into the boat and left.  The man from whom the demons had gone out begged to go with him, but Jesus sent him away, saying,
but no man can tame the tongue. It is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.
do something accurately
The basked slipped from my head
I
That which we would have done at the beginning was supplanted and so then we were distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish what we started out to do.
Tuyo-ong’s grave collapsed and washed away.
As soon as Judas had taken the bread, he went out. And it was night.
When the Liboganon River floods, the water is quick to recede.
one God and Father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.
Bow, or forepart, of a boat
But if you show favoritism, you sin and are convicted by the law as lawbreakers.
Crispus, the synagogue leader, and his entire household believed in the Lord; and many of the Corinthians who heard Paul believed and were baptized.
small bamboo lime container.
We happened to have propagated another kind of rat.
I was afraid of you, because you are a hard man. You take out what you did not put in and reap what you did not sow.'
Then Paul and Barnabas answered them boldly: “We had to speak the word of God to you first. Since you reject it and do not consider yourselves worthy of eternal life, we now turn to the Gentiles.
But he did not consummate their marriage until she gave birth to a son. And he gave him the name Jesus.
As for a person who is stepping down to the ground from his house, if he happens to be doing that at the same time a dove calls, he/she will not go ahead with climbing down to the ground.
and in the morning, ‘Today it will be stormy, for the sky is red and overcast.’ You know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but you cannot interpret the signs of the times.
We give something to our companions who have nothing to eat.
Lift up both hands
He shouted at the top of his voice, "What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? Swear to God that you won't torture me!"
scissors; to cut with scissors
"Which of you fathers, if your son asks for a fish, will give him a snake instead?
Are you pledged to a woman? Do not seek to be released. Are you free from such a commitment? Do not look for a wife.
“I am one who testifies for myself; my other witness is the Father, who sent me.”
And a woman was there who had been subject to bleeding for twelve years, but no one could heal her.
To come alive (fire)
Let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of such things God’s wrath comes on those who are disobedient.
But since we belong to the day, let us be sober, putting on faith and love as a breastplate, and the hope of salvation as a helmet.
So Peter was kept in prison, but the church was earnestly praying to God for him.
To be in relationship as siblings
When the twin-engine airplane flies, its wheels retract.
There is no fear in love. But perfect love drives out fear, because fear has to do with punishment. The one who fears is not made perfect in love.
aim
call
tone, voice quality
For we do not have a high priest who is unable to empathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tempted in every way, just as we are—yet he did not sin.
A woman divided her hair into two parts as she was she was rolling her hair into [two] pompadours [on her head].
name of a tree which has long, smooth leaves; also the name of a creek and a village
We had not yet discovered the good path.
"We can," they answered. Jesus said to them, "You will drink the cup I drink and be baptized with the baptism I am baptized with,
When I fuel [a fire] with wood and the fire becomes hot (it is alive), it is flaming.
As they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two of his disciples,
Give to everyone what you owe them: If you owe taxes, pay taxes; if revenue, then revenue; if respect, then respect; if honor, then honor.
The Son is the radiance of God’s glory and the exact representation of his being, sustaining all things by his powerful word. After he had provided purification for sins, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty in heaven.
Log, uprooted stump which does not have any more leaves left, just its body.
As for a person who is making a house, when he set the houseposts in place, he gets something to use as a brace with which to provide support for the housepost.
And I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. Another book was opened, which is the book of life. The dead were judged according to what they had done as recorded in the books. The sea gave up the dead that were in it, and death and Hades gave up the dead that were in them, and each person was judged according to what he had done.
The disciples came to him and asked, “Why do you speak to the people in parables?”
Follow a trail
Our dear friend Luke, the doctor, and Demas send greetings.
“Lord, they have killed your prophets and torn down your altars; I am the only one left, and they are trying to kill me”?
If anyone has caused grief, he has not so much grieved me as he has grieved all of you to some extent—not to put it too severely.
For it seems to me that God has put us apostles on display at the end of the procession, like those condemned to die in the arena. We have been made a spectacle to the whole universe, to angels as well as to human beings.
One of the criminals who hung there hurled insults at him: "Aren't you the Christ? Save yourself and us!"
He ordered the centurion to keep Paul under guard but to give him some freedom and permit his friends to take care of his needs.
This was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah:
From Attalia they sailed back to Antioch, where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work they had now completed.
Demetrius is well spoken of by everyone--and even by the truth itself. We also speak well of him, and you know that our testimony is true.
Pour the blood in a basin lest it leak out
No matter what I said, [she] wouldn't agree to stay with her other daughter.
A village on the Libogonan river between Manikì and Bulisung.
“Lord, have mercy on my son,” he said. “He has seizures and is suffering greatly. He often falls into the fire or into the water.
Roof
because you know that the testing of your faith develops perseverance.
cavern or narrow space between two cliffs
Then Jesus said to his host, "When you give a luncheon or dinner, do not invite your friends, your brothers or relatives, or your rich neighbors; if you do, they may invite you back and so you will be repaid.
narrow
When Jesus spoke again to the people, he said, “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will never walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.”
Beautiful; to have a good attitude toward someone.
After one eats, one burps.
Send the people away so they can go to the surrounding countryside and villages and buy themselves something to eat."
Live bird used as lure
stain; transfer color
[It's necessary] that [the girls] don't disobey what you have told them.
Listen then to what the parable of the sower means:
I did that because I who had been first to fish by illuminating the water with a light was being illuminated
No! But this mob that knows nothing of the law--there is a curse on them."
To push, pull or ride a water craft upriver against the current
At that moment the curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom. The earth shook, the rocks split
stray from a path
ground
Finally Pilate handed him over to them to be crucified. So the soldiers took charge of Jesus.
As for the lawa-an tree, when there is a lump of sap on the lawa-an tree, when it is hardened, that is the pitch which can make a light.
“Don’t you believe that I am in the Father, and that the Father is in me? The words I say to you I do not speak on my own authority. Rather, it is the Father, living in me, who is doing his work.”
All things have been committed to me by my Father. No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.
and goes home. Then he calls his friends and neighbors together and says, 'Rejoice with me; I have found my lost sheep.'
Erase
Then you will be handed over to be persecuted and put to death, and you will be hated by all nations because of me.
wiggly
Unhusked rice
To use something as treatment or medicine
pull or yank
Fast.
To show.
and said to Jesus, “Teacher, this woman was caught in the act of adultery.”
huge
Easily
To be alive
And in their prayers for you their hearts will go out to you, because of the surpassing grace God has given you.
Thin
a woman of high status
He has brought down rulers from their thrones but has lifted up the humble.
he/she
thick, as fabric or book pages
but because Jesus lives forever, he has a permanent priesthood.
If there are those who are bathing and are always floating downstream, that is drifting together with the current.
Saul cast a knife/sword at David but it just happened to lbecome lodged in the wall.
We strike the flint against it.
large camote with pinkish-yellow skin
squeeze tightly, hug
To the chosen lady and her children, whom I love in the truth--and not I only, but also all who know the truth-- because of the truth, which lives in us and will be with us forever:
If two children have fought with each other, [Their relationship] won't develop because they are now fighting.
“When Moses was forty years old, he decided to visit his own people, the Israelites.
Because
[As for] the raider(s), sometimes there are six, five or four people.
Red hot coals.
But love your enemies, do good to them, and lend to them without expecting to get anything back. Then your reward will be great, and you will be children of the Most High, because he is kind to the ungrateful and wicked.
Then Jesus went around teaching from village to village. Calling the Twelve to him, he sent them out two by two and gave them authority over evil spirits.
long-necked, two-stringed musical instrument
How much each? or How many?
When they came here with me, I did not delay the case, but convened the court the next day and ordered the man to be brought in.
To be cursed, especially in regard to stewardship or rice and camote crops
“If the world hates you, keep in mind that it hated me first.”
“Go away! What do you want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are—the Holy One of God!”
Dry
Toptop “even” [means] that which measures exactly the same; neither is longer [than the other].
test by touching with one’s finger
But because of his great love for us, God, who is rich in mercy,
bring together
We strain out the debris which was in the basin. It is the debris in the water which is strained out
To be afraid
Two people to move very close to each other
To refrain from giving
If there are older people carrying on a conversation, there are younger people who are paying close attention as they listen.
apply blood to something during a sacrifice
See that what you have heard from the beginning remains in you. If it does, you also will remain in the Son and in the Father.
“But what about you?” he asked. “Who do you say I am?” Peter answered, “God’s Messiah.”
The po-it fish, the mudfish and the catfish are directly born in a live state when they give birth.
In the past God spoke to our ancestors through the prophets at many times and in various ways,
Antonio testified against my uncle.
To envision, have a vision.
For he had healed many, so that those with diseases were pushing forward to touch him.
And these signs will accompany those who believe: In my name they will drive out demons; they will speak in new tongues;
"But the father said to his servants, 'Quick! Bring the best robe and put it on him. Put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet.
"This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many," he said to them.
There is this shirt which is probably about right for you.
As Jesus started on his way, a man ran up to him and fell on his knees before him. "Good teacher," he asked, "what must I do to inherit eternal life?"
and Jesus healed many who had various diseases. He also drove out many demons, but he would not let the demons speak because they knew who he was.
Then he sent some more servants and said, ‘Tell those who have been invited that I have prepared my dinner: My oxen and fattened cattle have been butchered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding banquet.’
“For,” said Peter, “it is written in the Book of Psalms: ‘May his place be deserted; let there be no one to dwell in it,’ and, ‘May another take his place of leadership.’
After he was raised from the dead, his disciples recalled what he had said. Then they believed the scripture and the words Jesus had spoken.
develop well, as a plant
As for the woman, she spread the flooring apart and that was where the spear passed through which was used to spear her enemy.
To decompose (wood becoming soft and crumbly)
Listen, I tell you a mystery: We will not all sleep, but we will all be changed--
shoulder blade.
small fish
There was some bamboo on which a dead tree fell which was splintered because the whole clump was cracked.
about
I want you to know how much I am struggling for you and for those at Laodicea, and for all who have not met me personally.
the person who is making a house, he works hard to finish making it because he will move in.
For the great day of their wrath has come, and who can withstand it?”
And then Elena hurried [to put up] the mosquito net and then I got inside so that I would not be stung.
All that is left
Stretch out your hand to heal and perform signs and wonders through the name of your holy servant Jesus.”
attend church
large forest spider
Each
Then they made Jason and the others post bond and let them go.
anyone
Quit talking because I will get fed up with you and I will happen to react in an undesirable manner against you.
large biting ant
The rice which was placed in the winnowing tray will just get spilled if there are children who will mess around with it.
divide up
To spread apart (as slats of flooring)
To reclaim something
When someone gravels a road, that is what is meant by scattering rocks.
If we are drunk from having drunk too much, we will be lightheaded.
And he carried me away in the Spirit to a mountain great and high, and showed me the Holy City, Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God.
To temporarily satiate someone's hunger by giving some already-cooked food to eat until more rice is cooked or the meal is served
His disciples stared at one another, at a loss to know which of them he meant.
For it is not the one who commends himself who is approved, but the one whom the Lord commends.
woodpeeker
They were not given power to kill them, but only to torture them for five months. And the agony they suffered was like that of the sting of a scorpion when it strikes a man.
Kausing nearly fell
for the spine to protrude
When there was a person who was in difficulty who was going to another house, he asked for help.
But if a widow has children or grandchildren, these should learn first of all to put their religion into practice by caring for their own family and so repaying their parents and grandparents, for this is pleasing to God.
strain or filter out
The disciples, as each one was able, decided to provide help for the brothers and sisters living in Judea.
And if any place will not welcome you or listen to you, shake the dust off your feet when you leave, as a testimony against them."
When the wheat sprouted and formed heads, then the weeds also appeared.
There is no need for me to write to you about this service to the saints.
The tikò insect moves its head up and down when we hold onto its body.
“Then the Lord said to him, ‘Take off your sandals, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.
Joanna the wife of Chuza, the manager of Herod’s household; Susanna; and many others. These women were helping to support them out of their own means.
To be strong, or forceful, as an earthquake or an ocean wave.
When he came back, he again found them sleeping, because their eyes were heavy.
for something to be forfeited as compensation for a loss
If the person's omen is bad, he will not proceed because he is being held back.
Repeatedly
to cut wood into tiny slivers for starting a fire
Pig can also be shooed away.
Christ is the culmination of the law so that there may be righteousness for everyone who believes.
As for a dibble stick, it become flattened as it is used for planting and so we sharpen it again.
In him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord.
The men replied, “We have come from Cornelius the centurion. He is a righteous and God-fearing man, who is respected by all the Jewish people. A holy angel told him to ask you to come to his house so that he could hear what you have to say.”
If he is not able, he will send a delegation while the other is still a long way off and will ask for terms of peace.
Cut me off a piece of cucumber
derogatory term for an old house
place close together
So get up and go downstairs. Do not hesitate to go with them, for I have sent them.”
avoid something
He bent over and looked in at the strips of linen lying there but did not go in.
The chief priests and the teachers of the law were standing there, vehemently accusing him.
little known remedy
Sister-in-law assumes that you will have your son go with us.
And again, Isaiah says, "The Root of Jesse will spring up, one who will arise to rule over the nations; the Gentiles will hope in him."
to be convicted; to establish guilt
right
Not only is this so, but we also boast in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.
For just as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, even so the Son gives life to whom he is pleased to give it.
No, I beat my body and make it my slave so that after I have preached to others, I myself will not be disqualified for the prize.
Then one of the elders asked me, “These in white robes—who are they, and where did they come from?”
Endure hardship with us like a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
Now that you have purified yourselves by obeying the truth so that you have sincere love for your brothers, love one another deeply, from the heart.
Then their eyes were opened and they recognized him, and he disappeared from their sight.
As soon as they got out of the boat, people recognized Jesus.
Pound rice with someone
choke, as of plants
As it is written: "He has scattered abroad his gifts to the poor; his righteousness endures forever."
A cap for a roof made of grass, it will soon deteriorate.
"He was made king, however, and returned home. Then he sent for the servants to whom he had given the money, in order to find out what they had gained with it.
To be disappointed
Rain
Then he told them many things in parables, saying: “A farmer went out to sow his seed.
perspiration
scream.
so that you may become blameless and pure, children of God without fault in a crooked and depraved generation, in which you shine like stars in the universe
When we go downriver by raft, when we return we pull the gakit in going upriver against the current.
Pop like popcorn
And I saw a beast coming out of the sea. He had ten horns and seven heads, with ten crowns on his horns, and on each head a blasphemous name. The beast I saw resembled a leopard, but had feet like those of a bear and a mouth like that of a lion. The dragon gave the beast his power and his throne and great authority.
As for Cain, he got his younger sibling off by himself to kill.
asking
They risked their lives for me. Not only I but all the churches of the Gentiles are grateful to them.
But I think it is necessary to send back to you Epaphroditus, my brother, fellow worker and fellow soldier, who is also your messenger, whom you sent to take care of my needs.
So many gathered that there was no room left, not even outside the door, and he preached the word to them. Some men came, bringing to him a paralytic, carried by four of them.
trip on something
That by which something is attached to another object, such as a rope or piece of rattan.
The adolescent frog is becoming almost the same size as the mother in size.
choke
A game in which a small arch is set in the ground
You were’nt recognized because your mouth was swollen.
cut off the ears of animal.
Indeed, you are our glory and joy.
If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not be guilty of sin. Now, however, they have no excuse for their sin.
and the way of peace they do not know.”
If the limestone rock is pounded into a powder it can be used as lime.
It doesn’t matter how many there are
Jesus replied, "Let us go somewhere else--to the nearby villages--so I can preach there also. That is why I have come."
sparkle, glisten
grow
The field which has been rained on for three days becomes dry and crackling when it has been drying in the sun for three days.
and will pay no attention to Jewish myths or to the commands of those who reject the truth.
While Jesus was in Bethany in the home of Simon the Leper,
If the river has risen, it will become divided in two parts because it has passed into a secondary channel.
rolling motion
The only thing they pay attention to is their doing bad
One's gallbladder is good if there is nothing to upset him.
Greedy
3rd left string of kobbiung
spear with detachable barbed head held in place with a rope
I tell you, on that night two people will be in one bed; one will be taken and the other left.
He said to another man, "Follow me." But the man replied, "Lord, first let me go and bury my father."
If for example we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done at the beginning is supplanted and then we are drawn away to something else so that we didn't accomplish [what we started out to do].
Whoever can be trusted with very little can also be trusted with much, and whoever is dishonest with very little will also be dishonest with much.
To address a little girl
sound of plucked instruments
You also say, ‘If anyone swears by the altar, it means nothing; but anyone who swears by the gift on the altar is bound by that oath.’
They have made a commitment [to each other] because their feelings (lit. breath) were the same. They have come to an agreement with each other. They desire each other. The attraction of the two [of them] is mutual.
airborne dust
embarrassed
She followed Paul and the rest of us, shouting, “These men are servants of the Most High God, who are telling you the way to be saved.”
Then, when I arrive, I will give letters of introduction to the men you approve and send them with your gift to Jerusalem.
A person who doesn’t fight back will be called cowardly by a person who is fierce: “You are actually a coward.”
biting worm
Stop for a minute
And no one pours new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the wineskins will be ruined. No, he pours new wine into new wineskins."
But Mary treasured up all these things and pondered them in her heart.
Suddenly a furious storm came up on the lake, so that the waves swept over the boat. But Jesus was sleeping.
We will warm ourselves by a fire if we are chilled.
As they sailed, he fell asleep. A squall came down on the lake, so that the boat was being swamped, and they were in great danger.
song style used to tell a story
There are many grubs which are squirming.
dip up
tell something to someone, converse
Who were they who heard and rebelled? Were they not all those Moses led out of Egypt?
Agrippa said to Festus, "This man could have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar."
He cannot claim it until he has taken it.
He said to them, “If any of you has a sheep and it falls into a pit on the Sabbath, will you not take hold of it and lift it out?
How much
To think about something; consider, ponder
step down
Humble yourselves, therefore, under God's mighty hand, that he may lift you up in due time.
If there are those in a some village who are under [someone's] authority, it seems that they are all his subjects.
refer to
Younger.
To pay oneself back for an unpaid debt by taking something belonging to another
Hunger
kneel, as before a shaman for healing
When they came to the place called the Skull, there they crucified him, along with the criminals--one on his right, the other on his left.
floor
grey
esus did many other things as well. If every one of them were written down, I suppose that even the whole world would not have room for the books that would be written.
We’ll leave early in the morning.
Jesus answered, “It is said: ‘Do not put the Lord your God to the test.’”
To stay 2-3 months in a location
Then he left the crowd and went into the house. His disciples came to him and said, “Explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field.”
If the vine wound around the tree, it wrapped around it.
Patient.
Be bothered
crosswise direction
sit down.
Do not be anxious about anything, but in everything, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to God.
We made slow headway for many days and had difficulty arriving off Cnidus. When the wind did not allow us to hold our course, we sailed to the lee of Crete, opposite Salmone.
The men who were guarding Jesus began mocking and beating him.
to another miraculous powers, to another prophecy, to another distinguishing between spirits, to another speaking in different kinds of tongues, and to still another the interpretation of tongues.
To hold onto
the commander ordered Paul to be taken into the barracks. He directed that he be flogged and questioned in order to find out why the people were shouting at him like this.
Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, sends you greetings.
Then some soldiers asked him, “And what should we do?” He replied, “Don’t extort money and don’t accuse people falsely—be content with your pay.”
fifty
to tighten something; pull taut
When Jesus said this, one of the officials nearby struck him in the face. "Is this the way you answer the high priest?" he demanded.
The burrows of the marmots mound are connected underneath to the places where they make their nests.
What are you keeping secret from me?
The corn won’t sprout because the small ants are affecting it.
Andi and her companion will blame me.
The apostles performed many signs and wonders among the people. And all the believers used to meet together in Solomon’s Colonnade.
Herod added this to them all: He locked John up in prison.
Taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke the loaves. Then he gave them to his disciples to set before the people. He also divided the two fish among them all.
We won’t let the hen develop her eggs.
When he arrived at the house of Jairus, he did not let anyone go in with him except Peter, John and James, and the child’s father and mother.
If there is a horse which I would hold (lit. reserve), I will give a pig as a downpayment.
Your brother has come,' he replied, 'and your father has killed the fattened calf because he has him back safe and sound.'
If someone purposes to blind us, they poke out our eyes.
the clothes will be swept away.
When he found one of great value, he went away and sold everything he had and bought it.
Give, and it will be given to you. A good measure, pressed down, shaken together and running over, will be poured into your lap. For with the measure you use, it will be measured to you.”
‘Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. What kind of house will you build for me? says the Lord. Or where will my resting place be?  Has not my hand made all these things?’
near; closely related; close to a certain time; almost; nearly
To draw near, close together
A number who had practiced sorcery brought their scrolls together and burned them publicly. When they calculated the value of the scrolls, the total came to fifty thousand drachmas.
To shed fur, as animals
Fear of heights; fear of falling from height
You were slow to make your purchase of the axe because you needed its price to be reduced.
John’s disciples told him about all these things. Calling two of them,
Again he prayed, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth produced its crops.
evening
What?

To seize something
Kunsay, cut the mat material into strips for me first I’ll weave.
On one occasion, while he was eating with them, he gave them this command: “Do not leave Jerusalem, but wait for the gift my Father promised, which you have heard me speak about.
Now there was a Pharisee, a man named Nicodemus who was a member of the Jewish ruling council.
If it is daytime, the sun is high.
These things are being taken figuratively: The women represent two covenants. One covenant is from Mount Sinai and bears children who are to be slaves: This is Hagar.
The horsemeat was dried.
So I thought it necessary to urge the brothers to visit you in advance and finish the arrangements for the generous gift you had promised. Then it will be ready as a generous gift, not as one grudgingly given.
Give proper recognition to those widows who are really in need.
type of small rice bird (maya)
To approach someone
But whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will never be forgiven; he is guilty of an eternal sin."
pass through someone else's property
An angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
And no one pours new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the new wine will burst the skins, the wine will run out and the wineskins will be ruined.
For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and he who humbles himself will be exalted."
close one’s eyelids
even though
Likewise, teach the older women to be reverent in the way they live, not to be slanderers or addicted to much wine, but to teach what is good.
Then Jesus said to her, “Woman, you have great faith! Your request is granted.” And her daughter was healed at that moment.
Then the whole assembly rose and led him off to Pilate.
After the festival was over, while his parents were returning home, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem, but they were unaware of it.
Chop down a huge tree
Ear of corn
harvest
So I sent for you immediately, and it was good of you to come. Now we are all here in the presence of God to listen to everything the Lord has commanded you to tell us.”
I’ll watch the cooking.
Then Jesus declared, "I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will never go hungry, and he who believes in me will never be thirsty.
A message
boast; show off
But the Lord said to Ananias, “Go! This man is my chosen instrument to proclaim my name to the Gentiles and their kings and to the people of Israel.
Simon Peter, Thomas (also known as Didymus), Nathanael from Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two other disciples were together.
Curved knife
A kind of black, short, small-grained rice.
"When you see 'the abomination that causes desolation' standing where it does not belong--let the reader understand--then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.
to squash or crush by squeezing, sitting, or stepping on
He said to them, "Do you still not understand?"
gills
The death he died, he died to sin once for all; but the life he lives, he lives to God.
Whenever you enter a house, stay there until you leave that town.
Jesus saw that they wanted to ask him about this, so he said to them, “Are you asking one another what I meant when I said, ‘In a little while you will see me no more, and then after a little while you will see me’?”
put together
I will rescue you from your own people and from the Gentiles. I am sending you to them
Joaquin cannot manage to resolve this problem because it is very difficult.
But Jesus told him, “Follow me, and let the dead bury their own dead.”
bump
But not all the Israelites accepted the good news. For Isaiah says, “Lord, who has believed our message?”
They came to him and said, "Teacher, we know you are a man of integrity. You aren't swayed by men, because you pay no attention to who they are; but you teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. Is it right to pay taxes to Caesar or not?
Can any of you prove me guilty of sin? If I am telling the truth, why don't you believe me?
That namu torch, it is what is used to release ??  the smoke so that the bees will be smoked and leave.
All kinds of animals, birds, reptiles and creatures of the sea are being tamed and have been tamed by man,
And he is not served by human hands, as if he needed anything, because he himself gives all men life and breath and everything else.
Starting from the beginning, Peter told them the whole story:
Long ago, our bodies were [formed of] fingernail.
and Abraham gave him a tenth of everything. First, his name means "king of righteousness"; then also, "king of Salem" means "king of peace."
to flick something off
and envy; drunkenness, orgies, and the like. I warn you, as I did before, that those who live like this will not inherit the kingdom of God.
To search for.
Among the crowds there was widespread whispering about him. Some said, "He is a good man."
by the power of signs and miracles, through the power of the Spirit. So from Jerusalem all the way around to Illyricum, I have fully proclaimed the gospel of Christ.
For we brought nothing into the world, and we can take nothing out of it.
missing
cause someone to pay attention
in beatings, imprisonments and riots; in hard work, sleepless nights and hunger;
Blessed is the one who reads aloud the words of this prophecy, and blessed are those who hear it and take to heart what is written in it, because the time is near.
When the Lord saw her, his heart went out to her and he said, “Don’t cry.”
For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms.
We’ll prepare the food.
If our blood is lacking we will be lightheaded when we walk and we won't be able to manage to get around.
But everyone who hears these words of mine and does not put them into practice is like a foolish man who built his house on sand.
When a bamboo water pole tips over, the water spills but it is slow to go out because the mouth is narrow.
privately
Surely he says this for us, doesn’t he? Yes, this was written for us, because whoever plows and threshes should be able to do so in the hope of sharing in the harvest.
No manners
When its feet are bound, a chicken will flap its wings or flutter so that it can get loose.
Taganay is the one to manipulate [the baby's position].
throat
Jesus wept.
Jesus said to the man with the shriveled hand, "Stand up in front of everyone."
First of all, you must understand that in the last days scoffers will come, scoffing and following their own evil desires.
Trembling and bewildered, the women went out and fled from the tomb. They said nothing to anyone, because they were afraid.
squeeze past others, as in a crowd
"Lord," Martha said to Jesus, "if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
My nylon cord fell from the table and became tangled because it became dishevelled because it came off of the spool.
do the things Abraham did. As it is, you are determined to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God. Abraham did not do such things.
They took palm branches and went out to meet him, shouting, “Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! Blessed is the king of Israel!”
attach
but accepts from every nation the one who fears him and does what is right.
Each man should give what he has decided in his heart to give, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for God loves a cheerful giver.
For to me, to live is Christ and to die is gain.
To get married
But who are you, a human being, to talk back to God? “Shall what is formed say to the one who formed it, ‘Why did you make me like this?’”
I am confident in the Lord that you will take no other view. The one who is throwing you into confusion will pay the penalty, whoever he may be.
and to present her to himself as a radiant church, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless.
It's noon
A person who has many veins which protrude above the skin
To pull out as a tooth.
kind of red rice
Jesus said to him, “Away from me, Satan! For it is written: ‘Worship the Lord your God, and serve him only.’”
Go over there.
I was unconscious  for a half hour before I came to.
When the sky is clear, the clouds are just thin and the rays of the sun [shine] through.
Early in the morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people made their plans how to have Jesus executed.
There was a person who had been murdered who se body was found sprawled out on the ground as he was lying there dead.
There are many kinds of variegated alik-ik plants in our place they are not used to make steamed bread from corn. The only kind that is used is the green alik-ik plant.
The Pharisees came and began to question Jesus. To test him, they asked him for a sign from heaven.
But it turned out that he failed [to keep his promise] and he did not repay [the money he borrowed].
For I will forgive their wickedness and will remember their sins no more."
Shake water from hands.
If you build a fire and blow on it, you will get smoke in your eyes and they start smarting.
Leave them; they are blind guides. If the blind lead the blind, both will fall into a pit.”
To whine for food
Pineapple.
He who has an ear, let him hear.
fast, abstain from eating rice.
But God raised him from the dead,
Be completely humble and gentle; be patient, bearing with one another in love.
to unfold, as a letter
If we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done in the beginning is supplanted  And then we are distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish what we started out to do.
To sprinkle (as powder or seed)
And he said to them: "You have a fine way of setting aside the commands of God in order to observe your own traditions!
the oath he swore to our father Abraham:
But if Christ is in you, then even though your body is subject to death because of sin, the Spirit gives life because of righteousness.
gnaw, as a dog gnaws a bone
Can both fresh water and salt water flow from the same spring?
People will come from east and west and north and south, and will take their places at the feast in the kingdom of God.
pray
The crocodile forced him into an eel burrow. ??
catch,
press down; compress; tightly compress; push in; depress
If you have insomnia, you cannot sleep. You are always tossing and turning as you lay there and you are always sweating until it becomes morning.
“I am the true vine, and my Father is the gardener.”
Greet also the church that meets at their house. Greet my dear friend Epenetus, who was the first convert to Christ in the province of Asia.
Generic term for any bird related to the hawk or eagle which preys on chickens, snakes or other small birds or animals.
fancy knife used for self-defense
kidnap
responsibility
"But not during the Feast," they said, "or the people may riot."
I had to eat some food to temporarily satiate my hunger.
"Be dressed ready for service and keep your lamps burning, like men waiting for their master to return from a wedding banquet, so that when he comes and knocks they can immediately open the door for him.
But they did not find any, though many false witnesses came forward. Finally two came forward
If there is a person who [wants to] borrow get something on credit but is ashamed to speak up, then he will tell another person. That person will say, “He has something to discuss with you.”
Bad smelling
But he walked right through the crowd and went on his way.
Submit yourselves for the Lord's sake to every authority instituted among men: whether to the king, as the supreme authority,
grunt of a pig, especially when frightened
chaff of tiny broken rice chips (usually given to chickens)
mark
When we cut down vines for a useful purpose, we cut off the stalks lit. body of the rattan and we take them.
When Herod realized that he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was furious, and he gave orders to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity who were two years old and under, in accordance with the time he had learned from the Magi.
They said to you, "In the last times there will be scoffers who will follow their own ungodly desires."
James, Cephas and John, those esteemed as pillars, gave me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship when they recognized the grace given to me. They agreed that we should go to the Gentiles, and they to the circumcised.
The servant’s master took pity on him, canceled the debt and let him go.
If there are those which we-excl join together, [they are] each a small unit, [or] a satallite
If you forgive anyone his sins, they are forgiven; if you do not forgive them, they are not forgiven."
I went in response to a revelation and, meeting privately with those esteemed as leaders, I presented to them the gospel that I preach among the Gentiles. I wanted to be sure I was not running and had not been running my race in vain.
To leave behind
Do not suppose that I have come to bring peace to the earth. I did not come to bring peace, but a sword.
All the saints send their greetings.
To swear or vow
and not to steal from them, but to show that they can be fully trusted, so that in every way they will make the teaching about God our Savior attractive.
shrew
To the church of God in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus and called to be his holy people, together with all those everywhere who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ—their Lord and ours:
The royal official said, “Sir, come down before my child dies.”
Indeed, in our hearts we felt the sentence of death. But this happened that we might not rely on ourselves but on God, who raises the dead.
If your brother is distressed because of what you eat, you are no longer acting in love. Do not by your eating destroy your brother for whom Christ died.
He contradicted that which was said by someone else.
So Jesus said, "When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am the one I claim to be and that I do nothing on my own but speak just what the Father has taught me.
But since they could see the man who had been healed standing there with them, there was nothing they could say.
affected by actions of someone else
Tirino said, “Those who don't feel unsafe, don't leave Kapugi. If [you] feel unsafe, leave together now for Maambao because there are warning of raiders for a while.”
For Jesus had said to him, "Come out of this man, you evil spirit!"
to raid
My companions saw the light, but they did not understand the voice of him who was speaking to me.
If someone asks, “What day is tomorrow?” The reason he is asking is because he does not know whether the next day might be Monday or Wednesday.
Now when Jesus returned, a crowd welcomed him, for they were all expecting him.
When there is a shallow mini-lake of water which doesn't dry up, that is a swamp because it has never been cut.
To eat with fingers, squeezing food into a ball
colorfully-patterned abaca skirt
For there is one God and one mediator between God and mankind, the man Christ Jesus,
calf of leg
His house.
This little chick has sprouted wings.
(Now Jesus himself had pointed out that a prophet has no honor in his own country.)
to eat
hunt with a dog
Smell, odor; to smell something or sniff out a scent.
We pray this so that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Doorsill; good
repay
The people will sleep on the ground who are making shelters to sleep for one night.
Spear for fish or eel.
Small, flying insects that are especially prevalent in rainy weather and warm around outside the houses.
to cut a tree on one side so that it will fall in the direction it is leaning
Upon receiving such orders, he put them in the inner cell and fastened their feet in the stocks.
answer
That word ig-agpas, you rush a person so that they will quickly finish something.
Truly I tell you, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.
Jesus entered the temple courts and drove out all who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves.
It is not as though God’s word had failed. For not all who are descended from Israel are Israel.
To take care of someone left behind
To dribble saliva, drool.
In the past, he let all nations go their own way.
To pity, feel sorry for.
who has gone into heaven and is at God's right hand--with angels, authorities and powers in submission to him.
daddy-long-legs spider
But many who heard the message believed; so the number of men who believed grew to about five thousand.
And this gospel of the kingdom will be preached in the whole world as a testimony to all nations, and then the end will come.
Jesus said to them, “Have you never read in the Scriptures: ‘The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone; the Lord has done this, and it is marvelous in our eyes’?
Finally I checked out the fish trap and it was was |filled|with small fish which were caught in the fish trap.
A kind of white rice.
wooden stakes or pointed sticks
blow (with breath)
When I went to Jerusalem, the chief priests and elders of the Jews brought charges against him and asked that he be condemned.
Blessed is anyone who does not stumble on account of me.”
Furthermore, just as they did not think it worthwhile to retain the knowledge of God, so God gave them over to a depraved mind, so that they do what ought not to be done.
A large herd of pigs was feeding on the nearby hillside.
Birth
To be healthy
set
Then I was told, “You must prophesy again about many peoples, nations, languages and kings.”
You are all children of the light and children of the day. We do not belong to the night or to the darkness.
Pray that your flight will not take place in winter or on the Sabbath.
Now you, if you call yourself a Jew; if you rely on the law and boast in God;
to walk around something
After he had said this, he stayed in Galilee.
skin abrasion
Something with a lot of hair or feathers; hairy, furry, feathery
darken
a woman came to him with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume, which she poured on his head as he was reclining at the table.
A rattan seive is the plug of a lime container. It is made of rattan and is a seive for the lime.
leak through.
When the airplane lands in Maambago, many people come to find out what guests have arrived.
centipede
Unit of measure, an arm span
The angry person, vented his anger; he went right ahead and spoke. He spoke loudly because we are taken by surprise.
So we see that they were not able to enter, because of their unbelief.
How often
You be the ones [to talk] now.
but the crowds learned about it and followed him. He welcomed them and spoke to them about the kingdom of God, and healed those who needed healing.
frying pan
Then he turned to his disciples and said privately, “Blessed are the eyes that see what you see.
diagram
iguana
you (2nd person plural, topic pronoun)
But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of this, they tore their clothes and rushed out into the crowd, shouting:
Suddenly Jesus met them. “Greetings,” he said. They came to him, clasped his feet and worshiped him.
Anyone who runs ahead and does not continue in the teaching of Christ does not have God; whoever continues in the teaching has both the Father and the Son.
singe
The wave(s) are/were very strong.
Uproot, pull up.
Yet there are some of you who do not believe." For Jesus had known from the beginning which of them did not believe and who would betray him.
Jesus looked at him and said, “How hard it is for the rich to enter the kingdom of God!
“Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, because great is your reward in heaven. For that is how their ancestors treated the prophets.
kind of tree, wood used in rice charm
If there are those in a some village who are under someone's authority, it seems that they are all his subjects.
Maambago is important because it is admired because the people are good.
When we wash clothes, even if there isn't very much sunshine we can still dry them in the sun because they will still become dry if they will be blown in the wind.
Only let us live up to what we have already attained.
John's baptism--was it from heaven, or from men?"
descendant
I, me (1st person singular)
meet on the way from different directions
“A voice is heard in Ramah, weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted, because they are no more.”
lay something on its stomach
“Teacher,” they said, “Moses told us that if a man dies without having children, his brother must marry the widow and raise up offspring for him.
When the congregation was dismissed, many of the Jews and devout converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas, who talked with them and urged them to continue in the grace of God.
under one's arm.
slices prepared for cooking
and that they will come to their senses and escape from the trap of the devil, who has taken them captive to do his will.
Jesus sat down opposite the place where the offerings were put and watched the crowd putting their money into the temple treasury. Many rich people threw in large amounts.
To hold one’s breath.
crush between the thumbnails
a kind of kuglung
To have been given a long life; patient.
As he approached Bethphage and Bethany at the hill called the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples, saying to them,
And if you do good to those who are good to you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners do that.
sleeplessness; insomnia
When the Sabbath was over, Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices so that they might go to anoint Jesus' body.
A spring
because I know that I will soon put it aside, as our Lord Jesus Christ has made clear to me.
‘No,’ he answered, ‘because while you are pulling the weeds, you may uproot the wheat with them.
Cut off the sugarcane at the roots.
The wise ones, however, took oil in jars along with their lamps.
Hit it when you shoot the arrow.
So I declared on oath in my anger, ‘They shall never enter my rest.’”
Caiaphas was the one who had advised the Jewish leaders that it would be good if one man died for the people.
Someone told him, “Your mother and brothers are standing outside, wanting to speak to you.”
charge interest
They went to Capernaum, and when the Sabbath came, Jesus went into the synagogue and began to teach.
If a person is hungry, he cannot manage to work
own
Aren’t all his sisters with us? Where then did this man get all these things?”
To choose or pick out from other objects or people.
that
Boiled corn on the cob.
We must pay the most careful attention, therefore, to what we have heard, so that we do not drift away.
When people have a meeting, [and] when the meeting is finished, the people leaving for home clear out.
bathing place for many
The dog is digging because he is after the rat in the hole in the ground
Cloth or abaka fiber bag worn on the back
To be stained, as a shirt
Why should any of you consider it incredible that God raises the dead?
name of a village
We need to do our work diligently like a slave. We [shouldn't] swerve from our work.
I am the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. This bread is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world."
Then Jesus asked them, "When I sent you without purse, bag or sandals, did you lack anything?" "Nothing," they answered.
Don't take anything; we'll be seen.
belt buckle.
Repent of this wickedness and pray to the Lord in the hope that he may forgive you for having such a thought in your heart.
Sawing motion
I was unconscious  for a half hour before I came to.
Then Saul, who was also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, looked straight at Elymas and said,
Since Judas had charge of the money, some thought Jesus was telling him to buy what was needed for the Feast, or to give something to the poor.
enter
Then came the day of Unleavened Bread on which the Passover lamb had to be sacrificed.
Now instead, you ought to forgive and comfort him, so that he will not be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow.
they love to be greeted with respect in the marketplaces and to be called ‘Rabbi’ by others.
I write to you, fathers, because you have known him who is from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God lives in you, and you have overcome the evil one.
I served the Lord with great humility and with tears and in the midst of severe testing by the plots of my Jewish opponents.
The treatment for a field does not come from a prayer/sacrifice [to the spirits].
pretend
We’ll get slashed
To go and inform another village of death.
By myself I can do nothing; I judge only as I hear, and my judgment is just, for I seek not to please myself but him who sent me.
Neither do people light a lamp and put it under a bowl. Instead they put it on its stand, and it gives light to everyone in the house.
"At that time men will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory
Again he asked, "What shall I compare the kingdom of God to?
large
Then he addressed the Sanhedrin: “Men of Israel, consider carefully what you intend to do to these men.
and Jesus and his disciples had also been invited to the wedding.
I’m going to box you.
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked at and our hands have touched-- this we proclaim concerning the Word of life.
None of the rulers of this age understood it, for if they had, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
fat
and said, "If you, even you, had only known on this day what would bring you peace--but now it is hidden from your eyes.
bleed
Chubby
And the devil, who deceived them, was thrown into the lake of burning sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet had been thrown. They will be tormented day and night for ever and ever.
kind of shrimp which has hairs on claws.
At this, some of his disciples said to one another, “What does he mean by saying, ‘In a little while you will see me no more, and then after a little while you will see me,’ and ‘Because I am going to the Father’?”
home owners or family of owner.
At the time that [she] fell, it was five o’clock in the afternoon.
son-in-law
When we strike a flint stone, sparks fly out.
to hire someone to take harvest downriver
burp
And they sang a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders. No one could learn the song except the 144,000 who had been redeemed from the earth.
in the hope that I may somehow arouse my own people to envy and save some of them.
They discussed it among themselves and said, "If we say, 'From heaven,' he will ask, 'Why didn't you believe him?'
As for that married couple, that is the one which has newly been married but does not yet have an offspring.
Still other seed fell on good soil. It came up and yielded a crop, a hundred times more than was sown.” When he said this, he called out, “Whoever has ears to hear, let them hear.”
to be a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles with the priestly duty of proclaiming the gospel of God, so that the Gentiles might become an offering acceptable to God, sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
After this he went down to Capernaum with his mother and brothers and his disciples. There they stayed for a few days.
You have not come to a mountain that can be touched and that is burning with fire; to darkness, gloom and storm;
But how then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that say it must happen in this way?”
Religion that God our Father accepts as pure and faultless is this: to look after orphans and widows in their distress and to keep oneself from being polluted by the world.
Moses thought that his own people would realize that God was using him to rescue them, but they did not.
others that Elijah had appeared, and still others that one of the prophets of long ago had come back to life.
But you say that if a man says to his father or mother: 'Whatever help you might otherwise have received from me is Corban' (that is, a gift devoted to God), then you no longer let him do anything for his father or mother.
"Are you the king of the Jews?" asked Pilate. "Yes, it is as you say," Jesus replied.
To pay a brideprice
Then Jesus declared, “I, the one speaking to you—I am he.”
kind of fish living at the bottom of the water
"Caesar's," they replied. He said to them, "Then give to Caesar what is Caesar's, and to God what is God's."
It's difficult for us.
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,
Everyone in Jerusalem heard about this, so they called that field in their language Akeldama, that is, Field of Blood.)
Retrace steps
"My soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death," he said to them. "Stay here and keep watch."
do not harden your hearts as you did in the rebellion, during the time of testing in the wilderness,
"You mean he has deceived you also?" the Pharisees retorted.
kind of tree with red wood and bark
A tagan, comes from bamboo and is a container for lime.
to crumble with the fingers, mash up
A red multicolored chicken went wild and changed into a wild chicken.
The water has puddled.
How many days
I sent for him.
Suddenly, when they looked around, they no longer saw anyone with them except Jesus.
Your boasting is not good. Don’t you know that a little yeast leavens the whole batch of dough?
So watch yourselves. If your brother or sister sins against you, rebuke them; and if they repent, forgive them.
so that, just as sin reigned in death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to bring eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
She wasn't paying attention to eating. Water was the only thing left [that] she was drinking.
if we are faithless, he will remain faithful, for he cannot disown himself.
Timothy, my fellow worker, sends his greetings to you, as do Lucius, Jason and Sosipater, my relatives.
All of them are being diligent
And a voice from heaven said, “This is my Son, whom I love; with him I am well pleased.”
You will look for me, but you will not find me; and where I am, you cannot come."
I told you that you would die in your sins; if you do not believe that I am the one I claim to be, you will indeed die in your sins."
Slaves, submit yourselves to your masters with all respect, not only to those who are good and considerate, but also to those who are harsh.
Ravelling, as from material or thread unwound from a spool
This is why he has to offer sacrifices for his own sins, as well as for the sins of the people.
When the sun has newly arisen, as for a house, it will be struck by the rays of the sun and the shadow will become long.
have sexual relations
In Lystra there sat a man who was lame. He had been that way from birth and had never walked.
You cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons too; you cannot have a part in both the Lord's table and the table of demons.
Uncle’s lung and back pain penetrates all the way through.
Above the ark were the cherubim of the Glory, overshadowing the atonement cover. But we cannot discuss these things in detail now.
kind of mushroom
the name of the star is Wormwood. A third of the waters turned bitter, and many people died from the waters that had become bitter.
As he taught, Jesus said, "Watch out for the teachers of the law. They like to walk around in flowing robes and be greeted in the marketplaces,
Then Herod called the Magi secretly and found out from them the exact time the star had appeared.
To utilize or apply the special secret knowledge to produce a cure
following
The meaning is uncluttered, straight and our understanding [of the words] is clear.
The corn will be skinny. The ears will be small.
Tree; wood
The person who is weaving cloth, uses the weaving bar to press down that which he is weaving.
Wash them right away.
We continually remember before our God and Father your work produced by faith, your labor prompted by love, and your endurance inspired by hope in our Lord Jesus Christ.
By no means! We are those who have died to sin; how can we live in it any longer?
dark spot on baby’s sacroiliac.
morning
algae or moss on trees or water
Of
met
Something long and cylindrical to cast
And the smoke of their torment rises for ever and ever. There is no rest day or night for those who worship the beast and his image, or for anyone who receives the mark of his name."
The person who makes a raft, gets a piece of wood with which to make a cross piece which is tied on with that which is used for binding.
But just as he who called you is holy, so be holy in all you do;
prison
persecutions, sufferings--what kinds of things happened to me in Antioch, Iconium and Lystra, the persecutions I endured. Yet the Lord rescued me from all of them.
Twist.
A divider
If or when a spring is new, it cannot be stretched because it is strong.
If they don't have property  [then] they are aliens.
For in this hope we were saved. But hope that is seen is no hope at all. Who hopes for what they already have?
Jesus knew their thoughts and said to them: "Any kingdom divided against itself will be ruined, and a house divided against itself will fall. If Satan is divided against himself, how can his kingdom stand? I say this because you claim that I drive out demons by Beelzebub.
coconut shell bracelet.
If someone visits [our house], we ask them, “So what is your purpose [in visiting]?
After the people saw the miraculous sign that Jesus did, they began to say, "Surely this is the Prophet who is to come into the world."
But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
put
How should I know?
Payow leaves are put on.
There is dark skin and there is somewhat dark skin.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
Lugtom has the older-younger sibling relationship with Gibangon.
guests arriving at mealtime and being invited to eat
There was a person who lost two hundred pesos of his money. He came to an end of looking for it but didn't find it.
Before I burn it, I pile up the wood.
The person who is old cannot manage to walk well because his/her knees hurt.
Banlak went down to the sea.
What good is it, my brothers, if a man claims to have faith but has no deeds? Can such faith save him?
To hammer
To enter a house
Now there was a man named Joseph, a member of the Council, a good and upright man,
As they approached the village to which they were going, Jesus acted as if he were going farther.
spill, as water or other liquids
Do not be deceived: God cannot be mocked. A man reaps what he sows.
When a boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
Put down
seek out
feeling
one who has become a priest not on the basis of a regulation as to his ancestry but on the basis of the power of an indestructible life.
even as I try to please everybody in every way. For I am not seeking my own good but the good of many, so that they may be saved.
Hurry and fetch water because it will soon rain.
light up, as a lamp or flashlight
As soon as the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy.
Preference
Then he said to his servants, ‘The wedding banquet is ready, but those I invited did not deserve to come.
stutter
May the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace as you trust in him, so 1697 that you may overflow with hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.
For even his own brothers did not believe in him.
The person who exercises self control when he is attacked is the one who will develop the ability to control himself and then his living situation will be peaceful.
Cheap.
But sin, seizing the opportunity afforded by the commandment, produced in me every kind of coveting. For apart from the law, sin was dead.
More than that, we are then found to be false witnesses about God, for we have testified about God that he raised Christ from the dead. But he did not raise him if in fact the dead are not raised.
"I tell you the truth," Jesus replied, "no one who has left home or brothers or sisters or mother or father or children or fields for me and the gospel
Of them the proverbs are true: "A dog returns to its vomit," and, "A sow that is washed goes back to her wallowing in the mud."
summit of a mountain
There are children who eat and then there is a lot of food which is dropped onto the floor.
For the one in authority is God’s servant for your good. But if you do wrong, be afraid, for rulers do not bear the sword for no reason. They are God’s servants, agents of wrath to bring punishment on the wrongdoer.
Repent, then, and turn to God, so that your sins may be wiped out, that times of refreshing may come from the Lord,
Getting along with each other; companionship or interpersonal relationships
Be transformed.
Indeed
We sought out the disciples there and stayed with them seven days. Through the Spirit they urged Paul not to go on to Jerusalem.
To stress or emphasize something spoken.
I planned to visit you on my way to Macedonia and to come back to you from Macedonia, and then to have you send me on my way to Judea.
For a raft, there are two cross pieces which are tied to the outriggers.
But how is it to your credit if you receive a beating for doing wrong and endure it? But if you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before God.
Seven
To slice rattan very small
dance kicking one's feet into the air
Grass
cut bamboo and remove the knot.
We avoid going inside a house if women are the only ones staying there.
gooey, sticky, malleable
Name of a location with a deep whirlpool and cave.
trap for rats or mice
The blind and the lame came to him at the temple, and he healed them.
What we rejected was insufficient because he gave us a chick.
Camote; camote plants
Fork
Then an angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing at the right side of the altar of incense.
A hat is also a head-covering but it has a name.
When he has married [his wife], he will erase the charm which he had applied |(to her] so that the thinking of his wife will become normal
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.
thin rocks; cement slabs
acknowledge
not in passionate lust like the pagans, who do not know God;
When we feel OK about something, it means that we are free of apprehension. We trust in him.
In the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar—when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea, Herod tetrarch of Galilee, his brother Philip tetrarch of Iturea and Traconitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene—
tired of
Out of the most severe trial, their overflowing joy and their extreme poverty welled up in rich generosity.
A kind of small tree
and Jacob the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, and Mary was the mother of Jesus who is called the Messiah.
Pour out
because a will is in force only when somebody has died; it never takes effect while the one who made it is living.
pacify
quenched the fury of the flames, and escaped the edge of the sword; whose weakness was turned to strength; and who became powerful in battle and routed foreign armies.
Not at all! Let God be true, and every human being a liar. As it is written: “So that you may be proved right when you speak and prevail when you judge.”
Make every effort to keep the unity of the Spirit through the bond of peace.
But Jesus immediately said to them: “Take courage! It is I. Don’t be afraid.”
We work hard with our own hands. When we are cursed, we bless; when we are persecuted, we endure it;
howl
Just one more supa.
Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, left the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
If we experience swelling that has not yet burst, our lymph nodes here in our groin will hurt.
I have labored and toiled and have often gone without sleep; I have known hunger and thirst and have often gone without food; I have been cold and naked.
make something strong or sturdy
We repeatedly drop the seed which we are planting.
“Sir,” the invalid replied, “I have no one to help me into the pool when the water is stirred. While I am trying to get in, someone else goes down ahead of me.”
There is another who testifies in my favor, and I know that his testimony about me is true.
While he was still on the way, his servants met him with the news that his boy was living.
travel up and over a summit
The dump truck which delivered the rocks, then spills them out.
My brothers, some from Chloe's household have informed me that there are quarrels among you.
Peace to the brothers, and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
The wet dog shakes the water off of his body.
deceptive, tricky
Therefore, anyone who rejects this instruction does not reject a human being but God, the very God who gives you his Holy Spirit.
But Peter made him get up. “Stand up,” he said, “I am only a man myself.”
As one who is in the Lord Jesus, I am fully convinced that no food is unclean in itself. But if anyone regards something as unclean, then for him it is unclean.
The losok snake has a mottled pattern to its body.
They did not understand that he was telling them about his Father.
The next day the great crowd that had come for the festival heard that Jesus was on his way to Jerusalem.
to shout
If someone is butchering a pig, water buffalo, or horse, we will command someone, “Go check it out because someone has butchered a pig. Get even one kilo.”
friend
roll up something flat
When the ten heard about this, they became indignant with James and John.
bask in the sun.
altar of rattan leaves
Do not offer any part of yourself to sin as an instrument of wickedness, but rather offer yourselves to God as those who have been brought from death to life; and offer every part of yourself to him as an instrument of righteousness.
outhouse
For if, by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through that one man, how much more will those who receive God’s abundant provision of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ!
Cotton
After this, Jesus went out and saw a tax collector by the name of Levi sitting at his tax booth. “Follow me,” Jesus said to him
I have domesticated animals.
Do not be like Cain, who belonged to the evil one and murdered his brother. And why did he murder him? Because his own actions were evil and his brother's were righteous.
Because of this, the rumor spread among the brothers that this disciple would not die. But Jesus did not say that he would not die; he only said, "If I want him to remain alive until I return, what is that to you?"
Least flycatcher, brown creeper.
However, if you suffer as a Christian, do not be ashamed, but praise God that you bear that name.
Then one of the synagogue rulers, named Jairus, came there. Seeing Jesus, he fell at his feet
fall apart
He took a little child and had him stand among them. Taking him in his arms, he said to them,
follow
" 'Get up,' the Lord said, 'and go into Damascus. There you will be told all that you have been assigned to do.' My companions led me by the hand into Damascus, because the brilliance of the light had blinded me.
to judge everyone, and to convict all the ungodly of all the ungodly acts they have done in the ungodly way, and of all the harsh words ungodly sinners have spoken against him."
If anyone has material possessions and sees his brother in need but has no pity on him, how can the love of God be in him?
At that time Jesus came from Nazareth in Galilee and was baptized by John in the Jordan.
The eagle/hawk which is called a bird of prey is quick to swoop down and snatch the chicken’s chicks when it preys on them.
For whoever has will be given more, and they will have an abundance. Whoever does not have, even what they have will be taken from them.
rejected suitor
He will also keep you firm to the end, so that you will be blameless on the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
We split open the pula palm tree which we have notched and then we see many white grubs which are squirming.
And he said, "These are they who have come out of the great tribulation; they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore, "they are before the throne of God and serve him day and night in his temple; and he who sits on the throne will spread his tent over them.
When she heard about Jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak, because she thought, "If I just touch his clothes, I will be healed."
Candy is sweet because it has sugar
It is possible for the plane to fly because it has been repaired.
bottle, glass
for it will not be you speaking, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.
But on arriving at the jail, the officers did not find them there. So they went back and reported,
to take over this apostolic ministry, which Judas left to go where he belongs.”
To withdraw to eat something alone
Fence or wall around a yard, house, or garden.
float
A white bird which dwells in a muddy area.
When he came out, he could not speak to them. They realized he had seen a vision in the temple, for he kept making signs to them but remained unable to speak.
Then they remembered his words.
But here is the bread that comes down from heaven, which a man may eat and not die.
Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
After a long time the master of those servants returned and settled accounts with them.
If the tips of a carabao’s horns are white, people will not make a pet of it because they suppose that it will horn people.
fry
The person who doesn't have an appetite , will feel unambitious to work because he has no energy.
I won't go because I feel weary.
so that through my being with you again your joy in Christ Jesus will overflow on account of me.
As for a hex, it is placed on us so that we will quickly die.
They were told not to harm the grass of the earth or any plant or tree, but only those people who did not have the seal of God on their foreheads.
Then he touched their eyes and said, “According to your faith let it be done to you”;
For Christ’s love compels us, because we are convinced that one died for all, and therefore all died.
For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sake he became poor, so that you through his poverty might become rich.
When we strike a flint stone, sparks fly out.
strip off
The last enemy to be destroyed is death.
When he saw Peter and John about to go into the temple, he asked them for money.
Well then, you should have put my money on deposit with the bankers, so that when I returned I would have received it back with interest.
Now about food sacrificed to idols: We know that we all possess knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
His fellow servant fell to his knees and begged him, ‘Be patient with me, and I will pay it back.’
Later, Joseph of Arimathea asked Pilate for the body of Jesus. Now Joseph was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly because he feared the Jews. With Pilate's permission, he came and took the body away.
as soon as
Now if I drive out demons by Beelzebub, by whom do your followers drive them out? So then, they will be your judges.
But if your eyes are unhealthy, your whole body will be full of darkness. If then the light within you is darkness, how great is that darkness!
and the Holy Spirit descended on him in bodily form like a dove. And a voice came from heaven: “You are my Son, whom I love; with you I am well pleased.”
Therefore let all Israel be assured of this: God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Messiah.”
Round hollow brass bells
After all, if you were cut out of an olive tree that is wild by nature, and contrary to nature were grafted into a cultivated olive tree, how much more readily will these, the natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree!
soft, as cloth or pillow
roam from house to house looking for food
Dam made of stones and leaves to impede flow of water used to catch fish and shrimp
But thanks be to God, who always leads us in triumphal procession in Christ and through us spreads everywhere the fragrance of the knowledge of him.
we all
Two men wrestle with each other to discover who is the strongest.
Grace and peace to you from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Ask the Lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.”
Fathers, do not embitter your children, or they will become discouraged.
If you are in doubt about your companions, you make them smaller in your hearts.
For then there will be great distress, unequaled from the beginning of the world until now—and never to be equaled again.
Cutting
The Spirit told me to have no hesitation about going with them. These six brothers also went with me, and we entered the man’s house.
Yet he has not left himself without testimony: He has shown kindness by giving you rain from heaven and crops in their seasons; he provides you with plenty of food and fills your hearts with joy.”
That which he blamed on (lit. caused to be attributed to) someone else, was done to cover up his fault.
And because of his words many more became believers.
When I took hold of the matirong fish, I was stung in my hand because it was wounded by the barb and then the lymph nodes under my arm became swollen.
The people have a good relationship because they share with each other whenever they have something to eat
Prompted by her mother, she said, “Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptist.”
If he doesn't treat his companion well he will act badly toward him because he will do wrong things to him.
To this he replied: “Brothers and fathers, listen to me! The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham while he was still in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Harran.
To search for a pig
tsk
When the child crawls, it also moves forward.
They were amazed at his teaching, because his words had authority.
"Why do you call me good?" Jesus answered. "No one is good--except God alone.
“He cuts off every branch in me that bears no fruit, while every branch that does bear fruit he prunes so that it will be even more fruitful.”
As for the agsam vine, it is used to make leg bands.
and the scroll of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him. Unrolling it, he found the place where it is written:
So he sent two of his disciples, telling them, "Go into the city, and a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him.
They cut the meat up and then divided it nto shares and then they had the person who carried the pig on his back take the head.
borer or carpenter bee.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus our hope,
In that day you will ask in my name. I am not saying that I will ask the Father on your behalf.
An elder must be blameless, faithful to his wife, a man whose children believe and are not open to the charge of being wild and disobedient.
If it is the decision of the fathr and mother that you make them [part of] your family, they are no longer strangers; [they are] member(s) [of your family]
trash, debris
If we are forbidden we are negatively-commanded not to do what we were told not to do.
For the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard.
He sent them to Bethlehem and said, “Go and search carefully for the child. As soon as you find him, report to me, so that I too may go and worship him.”
"Do not be afraid, little flock, for your Father has been pleased to give you the kingdom.
So they took away the stone. Then Jesus looked up and said, "Father, I thank you that you have heard me.
They asked him, “Then who are you? Are you Elijah?” He said, “I am not.” “Are you the Prophet?” He answered, “No.”
That which turns into the agkud staple is buried in the ground for two days. It sours/forments but it is sweet.
The sky receded like a scroll, rolling up, and every mountain and island was removed from its place.
Very truly I tell you, a time is coming and has now come when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God and those who hear will live.
Even though it is small [it’s OK]
to stir, especially as something cooking
shine brightly, as the sun
Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you.
We are from God, and whoever knows God listens to us; but whoever is not from God does not listen to us. This is how we recognize the Spirit of truth and the spirit of falsehood
And I saw a mighty angel proclaiming in a loud voice, “Who is worthy to break the seals and open the scroll?”
I’m asking for water because I am thirsty.
they; them; theirs
By faith Moses' parents hid him for three months after he was born, because they saw he was no ordinary child, and they were not afraid of the king's edict.
spoiled
pinch
A kind of tree which has long thorns all over its trunk.
“Now that you know these things, you will be blessed if you do them.”
" 'Sir,' they said, 'he already has ten!'
cool off something
By the grace God has given me, I laid a foundation as an expert builder, and someone else is building on it. But each one should be careful how he builds.
For this reason I have asked to see you and talk with you. It is because of the hope of Israel that I am bound with this chain."
Oh, this wall which I had painted has been scratched!
because you know that the Lord will reward everyone for whatever good he does, whether he is slave or free.
The wild pigs escape.
Clear
Be dark as at night or when there is rain
By examining him yourself, you will be able to learn the truth about all these charges we are bringing against him.”
Jesus answered, “Those who have had a bath need only to wash their feet; their whole body is clean. And you are clean, though not every one of you.”
sneak up on someone in a stooping position
The child is making a depression in the dust and ashes of the fireplace.
When the moon comes up, our bodies are struck by the light of the moon, we have a shadow.
It is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
arrive at house to stay; arrive at destination; go to destination; make sure something reaches someone
Be always on the watch, and pray that you may be able to escape all that is about to happen, and that you may be able to stand before the Son of Man."
When the time came for the purification rites required by the Law of Moses, Joseph and Mary took him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord
type of inedible cane, large
unsymmetrical, crooked, or uneven mouth
slit
Now listen, you rich people, weep and wail because of the misery that is coming upon you.
a fruit to ripen ahead of others such as a banana on a stalk.
The buses and jeeps which pass along the highway, follow their path.
search around in one spot
“Caesar’s,” they replied. Then he said to them, “So give back to Caesar what is Caesar’s, and to God what is God’s.”
We’ll dance the sagudsud
so that no one may boast before him.
No one else dared join them, even though they were highly regarded by the people.
To grate
Then from his mouth the serpent spewed water like a river, to overtake the woman and sweep her away with the torrent.
In fact, no one can enter a strong man's house and carry off his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man. Then he can rob his house.
I am sending you out like sheep among wolves. Therefore be as shrewd as snakes and as innocent as doves.
As Jesus and his disciples were leaving Jericho, a large crowd followed him.
But they deliberately forget that long ago by God’s word the heavens came into being and the earth was formed out of water and by water.
So if I come, I will call attention to what he is doing, gossiping maliciously about us. Not satisfied with that, he refuses to welcome the brothers. He also stops those who want to do so and puts them out of the church.
Take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
boil over
Beard
Paul and Barnabas appointed elders for them in each church and, with prayer and fasting, committed them to the Lord, in whom they had put their trust.
If anyone is worried that he might not be acting honorably toward the virgin he is engaged to, and if his passions are too strong and he feels he ought to marry, he should do as he wants. He is not sinning. They should get married.
A person who has a bow and arrow set, that is a bow and arrow which is used to shoot if there is a blind for the birds.
short arm shield
Each of us should please our neighbors for their good, to build them up.
The arab knife is rarely used to cut a field because it is just strapped at the waist and worn when one travels in in case there would be an enemy.
He makes provision to feed the cat.
On their second visit, Joseph told his brothers who he was, and Pharaoh learned about Joseph’s family.
Jesus replied, “Let it be so now; it is proper for us to do this to fulfill all righteousness.” Then John consented.
Confident of your obedience, I write to you, knowing that you will do even more than I ask.
sleek, as fur
And I have heard recently that they have no children who have lived.  If they frequently give birth, the child just dies.
Don't have anything to do with foolish and stupid arguments, because you know they produce quarrels.
To gaze or look down carefully at something
When the young man heard this, he went away sad, because he had great wealth.
One of the calls of a white-breasted ubun-ubun dove.
Impet’s tail isn’t still a minute
to wiggle, as the movement of many bodies or tails
The foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil; our lamps are going out.’
scrape out, as papaya seeds
Younger sibling
I, Paul, write this greeting in my own hand.
to be missing teeth
Now while he was in Jerusalem at the Passover Festival, many people saw the signs he was performing and believed in his name.
And, "If it is hard for the righteous to be saved, what will become of the ungodly and the sinner?"
He has helped his servant Israel, remembering to be merciful to Abraham and his descendants forever, just as he promised our ancestors.”
Put the mortar under the house lest it get rained on.
Pull up as weeds; pluck out feathers or hairs
A furious squall came up, and the waves broke over the boat, so that it was nearly swamped.
soft and flexible
For whoever wants to save their life will lose it, but whoever loses their life for me will find it.
We’ll let the water return
dump
Bold, uninhibited personality
Measles
There are days when we don’t have an appetite. We choose what we desire to eat.
Then Satan entered Judas, called Iscariot, one of the Twelve.
A person who is making a field, has an ending of the edge of his field and that is how far he will allow his field to extend.
They wait until we’re sleeping before they come to shoot us.
Stubby tail or ears of a dog.
Therefore, I tell you, her many sins have been forgiven—as her great love has shown. But whoever has been forgiven little loves little.”
A house if it only has glass windows, they are transparent because we can see through to the other side because our view is unobstructed.
After this, Jesus and his disciples went out into the Judean countryside, where he spent some time with them, and baptized.
Jesus said to them, "I did one miracle, and you are all astonished.
And if your eye causes you to stumble, gouge it out and throw it away. It is better for you to enter life with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into the fire of hell.
Finally, brothers, pray for us that the message of the Lord may spread rapidly and be honored, just as it was with you.
Sister
broom
things known from long ago.
clip or clamp in place
A horse [tries] to throw the one who has mounted it so that we will fall off.
Now we ask you, brothers and sisters, to acknowledge those who work hard among you, who care for you in the Lord and who admonish you.
To press and rub something against another object (e.g., sharpening an instrument).
The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Here is a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.’ But wisdom is proved right by her deeds.”
Then he rolled up the scroll, gave it back to the attendant and sat down. The eyes of everyone in the synagogue were fastened on him.
Pursue, as someone fleeing
rattan trap for fox
mix different kinds together
[As for] the person who doesn't believe a warning that there are raiders, [he] will be ensnared by [something] bad because he will be murdered.
small square woven bamboo basket
For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all men.
Flee the evil desires of youth, and pursue righteousness, faith, love and peace, along with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
The bunduy tree is leafing out now
Everyone is crying
A kind of heron
After he had spent everything, there was a severe famine in that whole country, and he began to be in need.
large water heron or bittern
They had Peter and John brought before them and began to question them: “By what power or what name did you do this?”
"No one ever spoke the way this man does," the guards declared.
My sheep listen to my voice; I know them, and they follow me.
You are unhelpful.
Now, brothers and sisters, about times and dates we do not need to write to you,
Do not repay evil with evil or insult with insult. On the contrary, repay evil with blessing, because to this you were called so that you may inherit a blessing.
For as the Father has life in himself, so he has granted the Son also to have life in himself.
Therefore let us leave the elementary teachings about Christ and go on to maturity, not laying again the foundation of repentance from acts that lead to death, and of faith in God,
Jesus warned them not to tell anyone about him.
I urge you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, to 1698 join me in my struggle by praying to God for me.
A large number of people followed him, including women who mourned and wailed for him.
A mediator, however, implies more than one party; but God is one.
kind of fish
It's on the shelf.
Climb up.
bark (as a dog corners a rat)
A person sent his nephew to fetch a carabao from Aninipot and then his nephew really side-stepped the order because he went instead to Maguiman.
tame
“Do you see all these things?” he asked. “Truly I tell you, not one stone here will be left on another; every one will be thrown down.”
There is a person who wants to buy a fish trap. He will ask, “Maybe it is OK with you (lit. suitable to your breath) if I trade a chicken for it?”
die in childbirth.
He taught them many things by parables, and in his teaching said:
And this is my covenant with them when I take away their sins."
hop
The person commands the evil spirit.
touch
He replied to him, “Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
split
See what this godly sorrow has produced in you: what earnestness, what eagerness to clear yourselves, what indignation, what alarm, what longing, what concern, what readiness to see justice done. At every point you have proved yourselves to be innocent in this matter.
To take food (possible translation issue)
whiskers
for anyone who enters God’s rest also rests from their works, just as God did from his.
The master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he is not aware of. He will cut him to pieces and assign him a place with the unbelievers.
By their fruit you will recognize them. Do people pick grapes from thornbushes, or figs from thistles?
The sabandal person is always upsetting his companion and is a very troublesome person.
Then he put his hands on her, and immediately she straightened up and praised God.
A bagakis is a braided belt made from horse hair which has been studded with beads.
A yell.
It was very upsetting because she supposed that there wouldn't be anyone who could help her to make a rice granary. I was the one who was able to come to [her] rescue.
cause to happen.
nothing
To ambush
clustered or grouped together
He or she just temporarily stays
If you have come in from outside (lit. from the ground) and you experience a pain which penetrates [through your body], you have been affected by an evil spirit.
If there is a landslide (lit. ground which landslides), the trees become uprooted and fall.
“Do you refuse to speak to me?” Pilate said. “Don’t you realize I have power either to free you or to crucify you?”
to be in the process of eating
To Timothy my true son in the faith: Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
with burnt offerings and sin offerings you were not pleased.
So it is with you. Since you are eager to have spiritual gifts, try to excel in gifts that build up the church.
manner of living
sting
fitting
wither, as a leaf
The lightbulb is above us.
We have inadvertently interrupted you because you are eating.
And let us consider how we may spur one another on toward love and good deeds.
You disowned the Holy and Righteous One and asked that a murderer be released to you.
Give back to her as she has given; pay her back double for what she has done. Pour her a double portion from her own cup.
Soft soil.
The leader of a village has political power because he is able to give orders.
grow
The chief said, “With respect to the debt of the residents of Kapugi, that debt has nothing to do with Maambago.”
But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins . . . ." He said to the paralytic, "I tell you, get up, take your mat and go home."
The person who is sneaking up on his enemy walks in a bent over position.
to a virgin pledged to be married to a man named Joseph, a descendant of David. The virgin’s name was Mary.
That which we use to scrape the wood so that it will be smooth which was made into a scraper which came from balakayu bamboo.
When the dead rise, they will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven.
For while we are in this tent, we groan and are burdened, because we do not wish to be unclothed but to be clothed with our heavenly dwelling, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
Some distance from them a large herd of pigs was feeding.
A man ought not to cover his head, since he is the image and glory of God; but woman is the glory of man.
how I wish I could be with you now and change my tone, because I am perplexed about you!
Yearly
Name of an evil spirit dwelling on the outer side of house walls.
As he looked up, Jesus saw the rich putting their gifts into the temple treasury.
The ripening process is still incomplete.
After leaving them, he went up on a mountainside to pray.
They moved to Maambago because they had made a new airstrip.
At daybreak Jesus went out to a solitary place. The people were looking for him and when they came to where he was, they tried to keep him from leaving them.
He said to them, "This is what I told you while I was still with you: Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms."
But I know that even now God will give you whatever you ask."
For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John.
trigger
Last night an angel of the God whose I am and whom I serve stood beside me
naughty
Camote field
To transmit disease
rooster with long, bushy tail feathers
I looked, and there before me was a pale horse! Its rider was named Death, and Hades was following close behind him. They were given power over a fourth of the earth to kill by sword, famine and plague, and by the wild beasts of the earth.
Do not be afraid of what you are about to suffer. I tell you, the devil will put some of you in prison to test you, and you will suffer persecution for ten days. Be faithful, even to the point of death, and I will give you the crown of life
After all, no one ever hated his own body, but he feeds and cares for it, just as Christ does the church--
The misty rain, it comes from the fog which drips.
We’ll use the bolo to cut off the wood
ineffectively slash with a bolo or pound rice
Monkey do you have large thighs?
Next year.
I came to you in weakness with great fear and trembling.
All this is evidence that God’s judgment is right, and as a result you will be counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which you are suffering.
The mother may roll on the child.
One of the heads of the beast seemed to have had a fatal wound, but the fatal wound had been healed. The whole world was astonished and followed the beast.
To leave behind (involuntarily)
The Jews insisted, "We have a law, and according to that law he must die, because he claimed to be the Son of God."
A pussy, open ulcer-like sore typically with raised edges, especially of a tropical ulcer on the skin.
Stop over for a while and drink
For Herod himself had given orders to have John arrested, and he had him bound and put in prison. He did this because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, whom he had married.
we look someone up and down. We look at them from top to bottom or bottom to top.
It is like yeast that a woman took and mixed into a large amount of flour until it worked all through the dough."
"This calls for a mind with wisdom. The seven heads are seven hills on which the woman sits.
jiggle
buy
"I tell you, my friends, do not be afraid of those who kill the body and after that can do no more.
abandon
So Judas came to the garden, guiding a detachment of soldiers and some officials from the chief priests and the Pharisees. They were carrying torches, lanterns, and weapons.
in which you used to live when you followed the ways of this world and of the ruler of the kingdom of the air, the spirit who is now at work in those who are disobedient.
There is a person who teaches his dog how to hunt for wild pigs.
Now is the time for judgment on this world; now the prince of this world will be driven out.
lose one's balance
decrease in intensity
hair done
Large conical land snail
We owe a whole sack.
throb, as a headache or stomach pain
I have a horse and someone wants to buy it , but if I don't give it because I keep my horse back ?? from selling it.
This is why I have often been hindered from coming to you.
That was a different kind of threat because she was forced [into marriage].
step on
There are also heavenly bodies and there are earthly bodies; but the splendor of the heavenly bodies is one kind, and the splendor of the earthly bodies is another.
a person who manipulates, she adjusts the child with her hands but just presses gently.
They answered, “We have here only five loaves of bread and two fish.”
tooth marks
I'll hurry to go to Valencia because I will be benighted.
We’ll be surrounded by raiders if three people delouse us at once
As for a  person, [he] teaches good conduct to his offspring.
Contrary to a fact.
later
If a person walks and stomps, his steps are loud and we are awakened.
always moving, wiggly
He came and preached peace to you who were far away and peace to those who were near.
Skin inflammation (red and blistery)
cloth
Out of his fullness we have all received grace in place of grace already given.
Convinced of this, I know that I will remain, and I will continue with all of you for your progress and joy in the faith,
Feed the fire under what’s cooking.
I assure you before God that what I am writing you is no lie.
John was a lamp that burned and gave light, and you chose for a time to enjoy his light.
steam
“Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?”
Stomach
To ignore, refuse to pay attention to
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
So be on your guard! Remember that for three years I never stopped warning each of you night and day with tears.
abandon
romp together
People went out to him from Jerusalem and all Judea and the whole region of the Jordan.
From the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven has been subjected to violence, and violent people have been raiding it.
And sitting down, they kept watch over him there.
The name of the offspring of a weasel or a mongoose is also pup.
Coming over to us, he took Paul’s belt, tied his own hands and feet with it and said, “The Holy Spirit says, ‘In this way the Jewish leaders in Jerusalem will bind the owner of this belt and will hand him over to the Gentiles.’”
someone else’s cut hair
star
All you need to say is simply ‘Yes’ or ‘No’; anything beyond this comes from the evil one.
Don't test your mother because it's bad.
A woven rattan chicken carrier.
I tell you, use worldly wealth to gain friends for yourselves, so that when it is gone, you will be welcomed into eternal dwellings.
kind of apusow (white)
Above all, you must understand that no prophecy of Scripture came about by the prophet's own interpretation.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. He who overcomes will not be hurt at all by the second death.
When they heard this, the crowd and the city officials were thrown into turmoil.
When Jesus' followers saw what was going to happen, they said, "Lord, should we strike with our swords?"
He said to them, “Therefore every teacher of the law who has become a disciple in the kingdom of heaven is like the owner of a house who brings out of his storeroom new treasures as well as old.”
doe (female deer)
When he arrived at the other side in the region of the Gadarenes, two demon-possessed men coming from the tombs met him. They were so violent that no one could pass that way.
They will cause [the people] to be taken by surprise and then no one will be able to rescue them.
There was a person whose toes we touching and connected. to each other.
sing a story
acquainted
A second angel followed and said, “Fallen! Fallen is Babylon the Great, which made all the nations drink the maddening wine of her adulteries.”
shellfish like a small clam
Again, truly I tell you that if two of you on earth agree about anything they ask for, it will be done for them by my Father in heaven.
Turning around, Jesus saw them following and asked, “What do you want?” They said, “Rabbi” (which means “Teacher”), “where are you staying?”
My uncle said, "Let's be alert because this is his trick."
Those two were in agreement with each other
After Jesus and his disciples arrived in Capernaum, the collectors of the two-drachma temple tax came to Peter and asked, “Doesn’t your teacher pay the temple tax?”
and a great crowd of people followed him because they saw the miraculous signs he had performed on the sick.
tobacco
“To the angel of the church in Ephesus write: These are the words of him who holds the seven stars in his right hand and walks among the seven golden lampstands.
withered, such as beans or seeds
For God did not call us to be impure, but to live a holy life.
The children are pretending that what they are riding are horses.
He will be a joy and delight to you, and many will rejoice because of his birth,
an
To be benighted
who gave himself for our sins to rescue us from the present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father,
The tree by the water is leaning over. Its tip is upside down.
release
Concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered to him, we ask you, brothers and sisters,
Then they secretly persuaded some men to say, “We have heard Stephen speak blasphemous words against Moses and against God.”
hurry
We are unable to coerce a child if he won’t obey.
Unhusked rice
The flavor is the same because it is astringent.
Jesus answered, “Don’t you know me, Philip, even after I have been among you such a long time? Anyone who has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, ‘Show us the Father’?”
As for the child who has been neglected, he/she is lacking food, clothing, bathing and has no house to live in.
The iguana lives in the secondary forest.
Neither do people pour new wine into old wineskins. If they do, the skins will burst; the wine will run out and the wineskins will be ruined. No, they pour new wine into new wineskins, and both are preserved.”
that there were no needy persons among them. For from time to time those who owned land or houses sold them, brought the money from the sales
By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the king's anger; he persevered because he saw him who is invisible.
The Pharisees and the teachers of the law began thinking to themselves, “Who is this fellow who speaks blasphemy? Who can forgive sins but God alone?”
Then Jesus said to his disciples: "Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat; or about your body, what you will wear.
cogon grass
Jesus answered him, “It is also written: ‘Do not put the Lord your God to the test.’”
After this, we started on our way up to Jerusalem.
The person who is making a house will work hard to finish making it because he will move in.
whatchamacallit
Then I looked, and there before me was the Lamb, standing on Mount Zion, and with him 144,000 who had his name and his Father's name written on their foreheads.
Then he went out to the gateway, where another servant girl saw him and said to the people there, “This fellow was with Jesus of Nazareth.”
I planted the seed, Apollos watered it, but God has been making it grow.
A deep hurt, ache, or throb as that of a broken arm.
Tea.
To habitually visit other homes so that one becomes a bother
Do not be idolaters, as some of them were; as it is written: “The people sat down to eat and drink and got up to indulge in revelry.”
lump in throat
Brass arm bracelets
When you ask, you do not receive, because you ask with wrong motives, that you may spend what you get on your pleasures.
wonder about
This is how we know what love is: Jesus Christ laid down his life for us. And we ought to lay down our lives for our brothers.
As for the person who has many visible veins, his veins can be seen because they protrude
"Then the master told his servant, 'Go out to the roads and country lanes and make them come in, so that my house will be full.
You didn’t put your things in order.
If it takes a long time for you to give birth, someone will say, “Goodness, you are having a hard time [delivering a baby].”
decorated with twisted metal
to earn money
seeds of the pangi fruit
handle of bolo or axe.
A finger ring.
scratch or rub a body part against an object due to itching
thumping/dripping sound
Anyone can pass through the airstrip.
Name of a village on the Libogonan River between Togop and Magguiimon.
Satan was still thinking about what next he could use to test Jesus.
Something, as speech, that hits its mark, or is to the point.
When someone smokes, when the [cigarette] is finished burning, its ashes will drop off.
Saul got up from the ground, but when he opened his eyes he could see nothing. So they led him by the hand into Damascus.
Dried out plants on the beach were uprooted and whirled around as they were carried upwards.
“From others,” Peter answered. “Then the children are exempt,” Jesus said to him.
already died
When we put bits into the mouths of horses to make them obey us, we can turn the whole animal.
He replied, “The man they call Jesus made some mud and put it on my eyes. He told me to go to Siloam and wash. So I went and washed, and then I could see.”
Now listen, you who say, "Today or tomorrow we will go to this or that city, spend a year there, carry on business and make money."
“I replied, ‘Surely not, Lord! Nothing impure or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’
whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world or life or death or the present or the future--all are yours,
One of those days Jesus went out to a mountainside to pray, and spent the night praying to God.
Body louse
For this reason anyone who speaks in a tongue should pray that he may interpret what he says.
Anyone who has ears to hear ought to hear
Mixed rice (white and red grains)
To tantalize
choose for oneself
So they shook the dust off their feet as a warning to them and went to Iconium.
Or the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many basketfuls you gathered?
permit
Creep over ground, as sweet potatoes
Since he was not able to pay, the master ordered that he and his wife and his children and all that he had be sold to repay the debt.
To strike, or hit as light strikes an object.
bend
For he has rescued us from the dominion of darkness and brought us into the kingdom of the Son he loves,
But when you are invited, take the lowest place, so that when your host comes, he will say to you, 'Friend, move up to a better place.' Then you will be honored in the presence of all your fellow guests.
Shortly before dawn Jesus went out to them, walking on the lake.
Whatever town or village you enter, search there for some worthy person and stay at their house until you leave.
That person plays at his weeding; he doesn't stick with the task.
And no one after drinking old wine wants the new, for he says, 'The old is better.' "
A bird that talks at night
To be murdered; death after a warning
The Lord’s message rang out from you not only in Macedonia and Achaia—your faith in God has become known everywhere. Therefore we do not need to say anything about it,
When he was twelve years old, they went up to the festival, according to the custom.
The fire of the large trees keeps burning/smoldering. It will not be extinguished until the wood is consumed.
The reason she’s crying is because her younger sibling is hungry.
camote (Kapugi, Pipisan, Talaingod, Tigwa)
to command someone to go and do something
be sick
For the law of Moses has been preached in every city from the earliest times and is read in the synagogues on every Sabbath.”
So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate.”
Not that we are competent in ourselves to claim anything for ourselves, but our competence comes from God.
As for the person who doesn't believe a warning that there are raiders, he will be ensnared by something bad because he will be murdered.
What is this person who cheats? Just a thief (??) by whom we are being deliberately cheated.
kind of edible tree fruit
To experience.
Eat anything that normally is cooked, i.e. rice.
Lump of soft sap used as pitch
lovesick
threat
To work in each other's fields and be paid off by feast
When he rose from prayer and went back to the disciples, he found them asleep, exhausted from sorrow.
Then, after desire has conceived, it gives birth to sin; and sin, when it is fullgrown, gives birth to death.
If a person has fainted as a result of an illness, we will try to resuscitate him.
Sew neatly by folding under as a hem
Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Whoever has ears, let them hear.
Influenza.
For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet. 26The last enemy to b
return
When the members of the Sanhedrin heard this, they were furious and gnashed their teeth at him.
Correct
Bobbed hair
To him who overcomes, I will give the right to sit with me on my throne, just as I overcame and sat down with my Father on his throne.
To miscarry
To lie in wait
speckled tick
It was not through the law that Abraham and his offspring received the promise that he would be heir of the world, but through the righteousness that comes by faith.
For God, who said, “Let light shine out of darkness,” made his light shine in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of God’s glory displayed in the face of Christ.
If we have many concerns, we will feel overwhelmed.
resist
Now we see but a poor reflection as in a mirror; then we shall see face to face. Now I know in part; then I shall know fully, even as I am fully known.
to tune an instrument
Because of the signs he was given power to do on behalf of the first beast, he deceived the inhabitants of the earth. He ordered them to set up an image in honor of the beast who was wounded by the sword and yet lived.
There was something I didnt understand and so I asked what the meaning was.
To cure, remedy
necklace
Or if he asks for a fish, will give him a snake?
So she came running to Simon Peter and the other disciple, the one Jesus loved, and said, “They have taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we don’t know where they have put him!”
But the Pharisees went out and plotted how they might kill Jesus.
To get a thorn (in flesh)
Tailess (chicken)
When the people heard this, they were cut to the heart and said to Peter and the other apostles, “Brothers, what shall we do?”
Just one person to ascend at a time.
Jesus called the crowd to him and said, “Listen and understand.
After six days Jesus took Peter, James and John with him and led them up a high mountain, where they were all alone. There he was transfigured before them.
in order that the righteous requirement of the law might be fully met in us, who do not walk according to the flesh but according to the Spirit.
To become unconscious.
large wart
Won't share
Jesus spoke all these things to the crowd in parables; he did not say anything to them without using a parable.
As for that person who is persistent, he keeps coming back until he is able to get that for which he was begging.
When Jesus heard what had happened, he withdrew by boat privately to a solitary place. Hearing of this, the crowds followed him on foot from the towns.
Knot (thread/rope)
Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to your care. Turn away from godless chatter and the opposing ideas of what is falsely called knowledge,
Immediately Jesus made the disciples get into the boat and go on ahead of him to the other side, while he dismissed the crowd.
Push together
"What are we accomplishing?" they asked. "Here is this man performing many miraculous signs. If we let him go on like this, everyone will believe in him, and then the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation."
To sing to an accompaniment
Greet Andronicus and Junia, my fellow Jews who have been in prison with me. They are outstanding among the apostles, and they were in Christ before I was.
"About Jesus of Nazareth," they replied. "He was a prophet, powerful in word and deed before God and all the people. The chief priests and our rulers handed him over to be sentenced to death, and they crucified him;
"Therefore keep watch because you do not know when the owner of the house will come back--whether in the evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows, or at dawn.
But they did not believe the women, because their words seemed to them like nonsense.
But you are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, God’s special possession, that you may declare the praises of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.
And the four angels who had been kept ready for this very hour and day and month and year were released to kill a third of mankind.
mane (as of horse or goat)
Nor did they repent of their murders, their magic arts, their sexual immorality or their thefts.
For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my mind is unfruitful.
"What do you want me to do for you?" he asked.
When Jesus had finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went into the region of Judea to the other side of the Jordan.
A person who climbs a tree always moves upwards.
A multiple-pronged spear; to produce shoots (as young rice).
Then Jesus went with his disciples to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to them, “Sit here while I go over there and pray.”
headband decorated with beads
The one who will claim the head is the one who carried the pig on his back.
walk single file
being strengthened with all power according to his glorious might so that you may have great endurance and patience, and joyfully
And if he finds it, truly I tell you, he is happier about that one sheep than about the ninety-nine that did not wander off.
When Jesus rose early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had driven seven demons.
Are you going after ubud?
We all crowded over there into Lusogpit’s house.
give relief or aid
They cause [the house/village] to be taken by surprise when they have banded together in mass to attack so that all can, without exception, kill everyone.
Throw away
Clamp together
wilt, shrivel, wither
put
This is especially true of those who follow the corrupt desire of the sinful nature and despise authority
Peso
If one frequently wins at gambling, he always hits the jackpot.
Loneliness.
pinch someone’s cheeks
He/she is experiencing malaria.
They gave him a piece of broiled fish,
Or if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion?
It has always been my ambition to preach the gospel where Christ was not known, so that I would not be building on someone else's foundation.
finish
But many who are first will be last, and many who are last will be first.”
Some of the Pharisees asked, “Why are you doing what is unlawful on the Sabbath?”
For we know that since Christ was raised from the dead, he cannot die again; death no longer has mastery over him.
The jailer woke up, and when he saw the prison doors open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself because he thought the prisoners had escaped.
saying to them, “Go to the village ahead of you, and at once you will find a donkey tied there, with her colt by her. Untie them and bring them to me.
Delicious
Each person should remain in the situation they were in when God called them.
Through him we received grace and apostleship to call all the Gentiles to the obedience that comes from faith for his name’s sake.
To yell.
Bite
Goodness gracious this child who is always crying whose mouth is a cavern.
so...after all
If there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even Christ has been raised.
to ignore, not pay attention to
there is no one who understands; there is no one who seeks God.
To do something vigorously.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, To God’s holy people in Ephesus, the faithful in Christ Jesus:
We’ll be swept away by a wave of the Liboganon.
to humble one's self
fall through a hole in the floor
And he has come here with authority from the chief priests to arrest all who call on your name.”
“Neither this man nor his parents sinned,” said Jesus, “but this happened so that the works of God might be displayed in him.”
Lizard with short back spines
His body was refreshed. He was satisfying his body in the water.
Then some of the believers who belonged to the party of the Pharisees stood up and said, “The Gentiles must be circumcised and required to keep the law of Moses.”
The [color of the] tail of the kawwilì rat becomes white about midway
If he is scolded, he won't let it bother him.
To be closed (as a flower), or not yet open
stringy
Instead he went out and began to talk freely, spreading the news. As a result, Jesus could no longer enter a town openly but stayed outside in lonely places. Yet the people still came to him from everywhere.
Bless those who persecute you; bless and do not curse.
But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under law.
Not that I have already obtained all this, or have already been made perfect, but I press on to take hold of that for which Christ Jesus took hold of me.
wriggle as one's stomach when one is hungry.
rip
Pronged fish spear.
So when you, a mere human being, pass judgment on them and yet do the same things, do you think you will escape God’s judgment?
Listen
ashes
to perspire
fly away
incomplete
So do not throw away your confidence; it will be richly rewarded.
We did not follow cleverly invented stories when we told you about the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
Beetle
The widow said, "I'm after the house that Jeremy made but I don't yet have anything to use for payment."
With a mighty voice he shouted: “ ‘Fallen! Fallen is Babylon the Great!’ She has become a dwelling for demons and a haunt for every impure spirit, a haunt for every unclean bird, a haunt for every unclean and detestable animal.
But other Jews were jealous; so they rounded up some bad characters from the marketplace, formed a mob and started a riot in the city. They rushed to Jason’s house in search of Paul and Silas in order to bring them out to the crowd.
It will not be like the covenant I made with their forefathers when I took them by the hand to lead them out of Egypt, because they did not remain faithful to my covenant, and I turned away from them, declares the Lord.
Therefore put on the full armor of God, so that when the day of evil comes, you may be able to stand your ground, and after you have done everything, to stand.
When they are wriggling, your intestines are always moving about because they (lit. it) doesn’t have anything inside.
When they came together in Galilee, he said to them, “The Son of Man is going to be delivered into the hands of men.
finish a discussion.
Jesus answered her, “If you knew the gift of God and who it is that asks you for a drink, you would have asked him and he would have given you living water.”
Natural state
Squint.
persistent person
In my former book, Theophilus, I wrote about all that Jesus began to do and to teach  until the day he was taken up to heaven, after giving instructions through the Holy Spirit to the apostles he had chosen.
the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melki, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,
Above his head they placed the written charge against him: THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
cook something with water
Whoever acknowledges me before others, I will also acknowledge before my Father in heaven.
God is the one who has the greatest power.
When the old leaves have come off, they are replaced by new leaves and the tree buds with flowers.
To spread on
To our God and Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
he person who dove, he happened to bump his head against the rock in the water and his forehead was abrazed and he was injured badly.
Then he returned to his disciples and found them sleeping. "Simon," he said to Peter, "are you asleep? Could you not keep watch for one hour?
Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom.
The rain dripped through on the rice.
Tychicus will tell you all the news about me. He is a dear brother, a faithful minister and fellow servant in the Lord.
As they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples,
herbal remedy
Make them just alike.
Again Jesus began to teach by the lake. The crowd that gathered around him was so large that he got into a boat and sat in it out on the lake, while all the people were along the shore at the water's edge.
They will fall by the sword and will be taken as prisoners to all the nations. Jerusalem will be trampled on by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
You have lived on earth in luxury and self-indulgence. You have fattened yourselves in the day of slaughter.
Meanwhile his disciples urged him, “Rabbi, eat something.”
To glue or stick something onto something else
But if there is a means of defense, we who are living there won't feel insecure because our living situation will be secure
Mildew
Woe to you, blind guides! You say, ‘If anyone swears by the temple, it means nothing; but anyone who swears by the gold of the temple is bound by that oath.’
Young.
"Every sea captain, and all who travel by ship, the sailors, and all who earn their living from the sea, will stand far off. When they see the smoke of her burning, they will exclaim, 'Was there ever a city like this great city?'
It’s call was significant to us.
to be lacking
Jesus answered, “It is written: ‘Man shall not live on bread alone.’”
A shelter will be built on the raft.
After John’s messengers left, Jesus began to speak to the crowd about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed swayed by the wind?
For whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.”
To be able to manage
and when he had given thanks, he broke it and said, "This is my body, which is for you; do this in remembrance of me."
and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’?
Even if it is high or if it is short, thick or thin and surrounds a house or the yard, it is called an alad fense.
Out of the temple came the seven angels with the seven plagues. They were dressed in clean, shining linen and wore golden sashes around their chests.
The fact is, you have had five husbands, and the man you now have is not your husband. What you have just said is quite true.”
Then his disciples said to each other, “Could someone have brought him food?”
Those who had arrested Jesus took him to Caiaphas the high priest, where the teachers of the law and the elders had assembled.
But thanks be to God! He gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
To look
Rise! Let us go! Here comes my betrayer!"
If we are in despair, even if there is someone to resolve [the person's] feelings, his/her feelings won't be resolved and he/she will think of killing himself/herself
To make into lime
lance or open a boil or injury
dark
A deacon must be faithful to his wife and must manage his children and his household well.
bounce
to make her holy, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word,
People were overwhelmed with amazement. "He has done everything well," they said. "He even makes the deaf hear and the mute speak."
bend one’s knees, kneel
Be strong
When there is a tree which moves there in the rapids that is a tree that is moved by the current.
Such people should realize that what we are in our letters when we are absent, we will be in our actions when we are present.
bring something along
come up close behind another person.
One wouldn't say the Liboganon River was at high tide unless all of the flat area has been completely [covered] by flooding.
Those who were sent ahead went and found it just as he had told them.
“And now, Father, glorify me in your presence with the glory I had with you before the world began.”
I'll be the one to roll the hoop of coiled rattan.
Remedy, cure, medicine
At daybreak they entered the temple courts, as they had been told, and began to teach the people. When the high priest and his associates arrived, they called together the Sanhedrin—the full assembly of the elders of Israel—and sent to the jail for the apostles.
"But in those days, following that distress, " 'the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light;
Did not the Christ have to suffer these things and then enter his glory?"
Ever since I was a child, I have always lived in Mansalinao.
I'm doing you a favor.
Why did you take a huge fistful of rice when we are really many?
That person said, “I admit that it was really me who stole from you.”
leech
meeting to decide on a course of action.
to submit
Refuse in marriage plans
to decide, make a decision
For if God did not spare the natural branches, he will not spare you either.
fish hook (used in lower Langilan)
here
But when they believed Philip as he proclaimed the good news of the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
So the soldiers took the money and did as they were instructed. And this story has been widely circulated among the Jews to this very day.
But when the king came in to see the guests, he noticed a man there who was not wearing wedding clothes.
nod one’s head in agreement.
“Our ancestors had the tabernacle of the Testimony with them in the wilderness. It had been made as God directed Moses, according to the pattern he had seen.
Even now the one who reaps draws a wage and harvests a crop for eternal life, so that the sower and the reaper may be glad together.
We place the stone and bee's wax which is used to charm a person on [her] as an armband on her arm or used as a necklace.
For even the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."
Pelvic bone
Fragrant tiny bits of tree roots used in tayun (a traditional preparation)
We prepare ourselves ahead of time. It's as if we have had a intuitive warning.
slender
Then the man got up and went home.
When the believers learned of this, they took him down to Caesarea and sent him off to Tarsus.
He told them everything that had happened and sent them to Joppa.
Many deceivers, who do not acknowledge Jesus Christ as coming in the flesh, have gone out into the world. Any such person is the deceiver and the antichrist.
That one.
They asked her, “Woman, why are you crying?” “They have taken my Lord away,” she said, “and I don’t know where they have put him.”
As Scripture says, “Anyone who believes in him will never be put to shame.”
pointed or having tapering sides, such as a mountain peak or pencil tip
Go away for a period of time to test one's love
As soon as they left the synagogue, they went with James and John to the home of Simon and Andrew.
0Once you were not a people, but now you are the people of God; once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy.
If we kill a horse, we give it a death blow on it's head with the back of an axe.
Look, he is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, even those who pierced him; and all the peoples of the earth will mourn because of him. So shall it be! Amen.
hostess
If you had known what these words mean, ‘I desire mercy, not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the innocent.
If we step on the ripe fruit of the papaya, it will be squashed.
The only thing he/she pays close attention tor is watching his/her companions; but then [that person] doesn't pay attention to his/her own attitudes.
kobbiung tune and dance.
Pound with small pestle, such as tobacco or betelnut
many people with no authority
Clear the doorway so I can pass through.
If a spring is new, it cannot be stretched because it is very strong. We cannot manage to stretch it.
and Jesse the father of King David. David was the father of Solomon, whose mother had been Uriah’s wife,
If there is no secondary channel, we recognize when the water is returning to its place because the beach becomes large as it is left behind by the water.
The seventy-two returned with joy and said, “Lord, even the demons submit to us in your name.”
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! In his great mercy he has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
You do not realize that it is better for you that one man die for the people than that the whole nation perish."
Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all work miracles?
The person does not pay attention to his own purpose.
For three days he was blind, and did not eat or drink anything.
"I tell you the truth," he said, "this poor widow has put in more than all the others.
When Jesus saw the crowd around him, he gave orders to cross to the other side of the lake.
She kept this up for many days. Finally Paul became so annoyed that he turned around and said to the spirit, “In the name of Jesus Christ I command you to come out of her!” At that moment the spirit left her.
“For them I sanctify myself, that they too may be truly sanctified.”
Once again Jesus went out beside the lake. A large crowd came to him, and he began to teach them.
Peter said to Jesus, “Lord, it is good for us to be here. If you wish, I will put up three shelters—one for you, one for Moses and one for Elijah.”
You can easily verify that no more than twelve days ago I went up to Jerusalem to worship.
This will take place on the day when God judges people’s secrets through Jesus Christ, as my gospel declares.
May the God who gives endurance and encouragement give you the same attitude of mind toward each other that Christ Jesus had,
You will be told when [the grains] have filled out.
baby bird.
A person who reads a book, opens it up to read.
expose or uncover
Dumb
Name of a small weed
cut
On side of
A kind of black rice.
in purity, understanding, patience and kindness; in the Holy Spirit and in sincere love;
He replied, “Every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted will be pulled up by the roots.
Because of this, God in his wisdom said, 'I will send them prophets and apostles, some of whom they will kill and others they will persecute.'
If we place the radio on the floor, it is likely that it will be stepped on or come apart.
lay one’s head on something
So I counsel younger widows to marry, to have children, to manage their homes and to give the enemy no opportunity for slander.
respond to an invitation
The house which was not finished in the making, it wasn't completed.
small pool on a beach
to ball up something, as mud
the fifth sardonyx, the sixth carnelian, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, and the twelfth amethyst.
The angel said to me, "These words are trustworthy and true. The Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, sent his angel to show his servants the things that must soon take place."
sleep.
they say (reportative speech, implying doubt)
the Lord has done this, and it is marvelous in our eyes' ?"
Blunt
There was a woman who gathered her laundry together and wrapped it in a blanket.
“The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.”
If we are teaching a child, he is quick to understand.
no more
To set on eggs.
They replied, "Some say John the Baptist; others say Elijah; and still others, one of the prophets."
For there are eunuchs who were born that way, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others—and there are those who choose to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it.”
They left the room, and while talking with one another, they said, "This man is not doing anything that deserves death or imprisonment."
For I do not want you to be ignorant of the fact, brothers and sisters, that our ancestors were all under the cloud and that they all passed through the sea.
Pray that this will not take place in winter,
The woman came and knelt before him. “Lord, help me!” she said.
Our companionship has been cut off because we live far from each other.
Serve wholeheartedly, as if you were serving the Lord, not men,
small fox-like animal
My soul rolled up [the mat] and packed it in the basket.
His clothes became dazzling white, whiter than anyone in the world could bleach them.
So in everything, do to others what you would have them do to you, for this sums up the Law and the Prophets.
Jesus knew that the Father had put all things under his power, and that he had come from God and was returning to God;
to die because someone has fasted.
There is a [kind of] wood which is called gisois which is ignited there by the rice so that it will be smoked.
and to godliness, mutual affection; and to mutual affection, love.
And if a woman has a husband who is not a believer and he is willing to live with her, she must not divorce him.
loud sound
They said to the woman, “We no longer believe just because of what you said; now we have heard for ourselves, and we know that this man really is the Savior of the world.”
Dear friends, now we are children of God, and what we will be has not yet been made known. But we know that when he appears, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.
Don't act inappropriately over at someone's house
There was a student who was out of control who was slashing at his companions.
When we die, our possessions are simply left behind and cannot be taken where we will be after we die.
A metal band reinforcing a bolo handle or spear shaft
Jesus knew their thoughts and said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself will be ruined, and every city or household divided against itself will not stand.
When the daughter of Herodias came in and danced, she pleased Herod and his dinner guests.
for God's gifts and his call are irrevocable.
A needle is used to remove thorns.
To be suspicious
We scrape out the seeds of the ripe papaya.
to be edible
Let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up.
They spear us up through the floor
Whose
who through faith conquered kingdoms, administered justice, and gained what was promised; who shut the mouths of lions,
completed
To allow
"The time has come," he said. "The kingdom of God is near. Repent and believe the good news!"
Similarly, if anyone competes as an athlete, he does not receive the victor's crown unless he competes according to the rules.
The kingdom of heaven is like a king who prepared a wedding banquet for his son.
The mind governed by the flesh is hostile to God; it does not submit to God’s law, nor can it do so.
And when the time for the burning of incense came, all the assembled worshipers were praying outside.
So you testify that you approve of what your forefathers did; they killed the prophets, and you build their tombs.
short second-growth trees or forest
bad sign
But now, by dying to what once bound us, we have been released from the law so that we serve in the new way of the Spirit, and not in the old way of the written code.
The person whose legs are crippled, he scoots as he moves along.
It takes us a long time to arrive because we have to detour .
After John was put in prison, Jesus went into Galilee, proclaiming the good news of God.
Take something. Choose that which you are hungry for.
“Their throats are open graves; their tongues practice deceit.” “The poison of vipers is on their lips.”
When evening came, Jesus was reclining at the table with the Twelve.
Such regulations indeed have an appearance of wisdom, with their selfimposed worship, their false humility and their harsh treatment of the body, but they lack any value in restraining sensual indulgence.
I want you to know, brothers and sisters, that the gospel I preached is not of human origin.
As for the person who makes fire by rubbing something back and forth, [the fire] is alive if it begins to smoke.
Because of this oath, Jesus has become the guarantee of a better covenant.
His disciples asked him what this parable meant.
So he took him to the commander. The centurion said, "Paul, the prisoner, sent for me and asked me to bring this young man to you because he has something to tell you."
pay attention
Therefore no one will be declared righteous in God’s sight by the works of the law; rather, through the law we become conscious of our sin.
Some people easily come down with a cough and then get out of breath so it is difficult [for them] to breathe.
As a result, people brought the sick into the streets and laid them on beds and mats so that at least Peter’s shadow might fall on some of them as he passed by.
bright yellow fruit about the size of an egg
In the sixth month of Elizabeth’s pregnancy, God sent the angel Gabriel to Nazareth, a town in Galilee,
A person who makes a recipe from the tubod plant, grates the coconut with which he makes coconut milk.
For we live by faith, not by sight.
There is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither slave nor free, nor is there male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus.
Because God wanted to make the unchanging nature of his purpose very clear to the heirs of what was promised, he confirmed it with an oath.
And when you stand praying, if you hold anything against anyone, forgive him, so that your Father in heaven may forgive you your sins."
This is how you can recognize the Spirit of God: Every spirit that acknowledges that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God,
Some of the teachers of the law responded, "Well said, teacher!"
They were all filled with awe and praised God. “A great prophet has appeared among us,” they said. “God has come to help his people.”
Prolific; have a lot of offspring
accuse or blame someone
male of animals, especially a stud
Cast all your anxiety on him because he cares for you.
as soon as
"Now I commit you to God and to the word of his grace, which can build you up and give you an inheritance among all those who are sanctified.
profuse
All domesticated animals have hips but as for chickens, they don't because their lets are on their sides.
in front of
Name of a dance to kobbiung accompaniment.
wear wooden ear plugs
Their bodies were brought back to Shechem and placed in the tomb that Abraham had bought from the sons of Hamor at Shechem for a certain sum of money.
But you have this in your favor: You hate the practices of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
Fit
carved bolo handle resembling an alligator's open mouth
to proclaim the year of the Lord’s favor.”
You know the commandments: ‘You shall not commit adultery, you shall not murder, you shall not steal, you shall not give false testimony, honor your father and mother.’”
Drain (canal to drain water from pool to catch fish)
vine
For he has set a day when he will judge the world with justice by the man he has appointed. He has given proof of this to all men by raising him from the dead."
Kind of bird
There is a kind of rain which we call saginwalu.
Live in harmony with one another. Do not be proud, but be willing to associate with people of low position. Do not be conceited.
Name of village
To poke or plant a stick firmly in the ground.
become stormy
The Queen of the South will rise at the judgment with the men of this generation and condemn them; for she came from the ends of the earth to listen to Solomon's wisdom, and now one greater than Solomon is here.
Truly I tell you, among those born of women there has not risen anyone greater than John the Baptist; yet whoever is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
A rooster flaps his wings when he spreads his wings.
In fact, the law requires that nearly everything be cleansed with blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness.
High
one person killed by one raider
If there is something which has hurt someone's feelings, there is that which makes a person upset because something was said which hurt [that person's] feelings.
Jesus said to them: "Watch out that no one deceives you.
Peter remembered and said to Jesus, "Rabbi, look! The fig tree you cursed has withered!"
From there we put out to sea again and passed to the lee of Cyprus because the winds were against us.
We were still foolish. As for us, we did not yet have knowledge. We had not yet discovered the good path.
The Liboganon river was dammed up so that it could be used to water the rice paddy.
If they have escaped the corruption of the world by knowing our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ and are again entangled in it and overcome, they are worse off at the end than they were at the beginning.
produce ears
explain, make clear
goiter; thyroid
tree stump
Why?
When one of the Pharisees invited Jesus to have dinner with him, he went to the Pharisee’s house and reclined at the table.
We were nearly kidnapped by raiders.
But the one whom God raised from the dead did not see decay.
They drove out many demons and anointed many sick people with oil and healed them.
to get soaked by rain
We reinforce the braces of a shield by tying them so that they will be strong.
To him who overcomes and does my will to the end, I will give authority over the nations-- 'He will rule them with an iron scepter; he will dash them to pieces like pottery' - -just as I have received authority from my Father. I will also give him the morning star.
tell riddles at a wake
But the one who does not know and does things deserving punishment will be beaten with few blows. From everyone who has been given much, much will be demanded; and from the one who has been entrusted with much, much more will be asked.
stand leaves up along rock used to form a small dam in trapping fish
He saw one of them being mistreated by an Egyptian, so he went to his defense and avenged him by killing the Egyptian.
Knee bead
After fasting forty days and forty nights, he was hungry.
Boil (open or not yet open)
For we do not write you anything you cannot read or understand. And I hope that, as you have understood us in part, you will come to understand fully that you can boast of us just as we will boast of you in the day of the Lord Jesus.
The birds flock together feeding on the fruits of the tree.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
swim overhand.
Muscle
fan oneself due to heat
The crowd joined in the attack against Paul and Silas, and the magistrates
Fault
so in Christ we, though many, form one body, and each member belongs to all the others.
For when we came into Macedonia, we had no rest, but we were harassed at every turn—conflicts on the outside, fears within.
He went after the saw and returned it to me.
insist
kind of small bird.
You followed [the river] around its bends.
It also swarms around animals at night.
Since the children have flesh and blood, he too shared in their humanity so that by his death he might break the power of him who holds the power of death—that is, the devil—
They were all encouraged and ate some food themselves.
disintegrate
The visitors came and found us absent from the house.
The spirit which is called mountain resident is the owner which dwells in the mountains, balete trees, cliffs and waterfalls. Those are of the same nature of the busow spirits of the dead.
firm
black iridescent chicken
“As the time drew near for God to fulfill his promise to Abraham, the number of our people in Egypt had greatly increased.
bamboo mouth flute
water thrush
"To the angel of the church in Laodicea write: These are the words of the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the ruler of God's creation.
tire of waiting
Scales,
and the secrets of his heart will be laid bare. So he will fall down and worship God, exclaiming, "God is really among you!"
You know, brothers and sisters, that our visit to you was not without results.
teachable, quick to understand
to move about in all directions
Someone took away a portion of my land.
Truly I tell you, wherever this gospel is preached throughout the world, what she has done will also be told, in memory of her.”
witness to the innocence or guilt of someone
But whoever lives by the truth comes into the light, so that it may be seen plainly that what they have done has been done in the sight of God.
and receive from him anything we ask, because we obey his commands and do what pleases him.
If any woman who is a believer has widows in her family, she should help them and not let the church be burdened with them, so that the church can help those widows who are really in need.
lizard with large high spines on the back
real
He looked up to heaven and with a deep sigh said to him, "Ephphatha!" (which means, "Be opened!" ).
Simon Peter and another disciple were following Jesus. Because this disciple was known to the high priest, he went with Jesus into the high priest’s courtyard,
We are not withholding our affection from you, but you are withholding yours from us.
We are provoked that the horse was sold and so it won't be paid for.
Scrotum
Girlfriend or boyfriend
“If you keep my commands, you will remain in my love, just as I have kept my Father’s commands and remain in his love.”
“Come, see a man who told me everything I ever did. Could this be the Messiah?”
When you make a fish trap, it is loosely woven. The body of the fishtrap is loosely woven and the prongs are also far apart.
plant camotes and rice
Bread.
deceived
for you
Neither of them had the money to pay him back, so he forgave the debts of both. Now which of them will love him more?”
Lastborn child
When there is no more chaff, we cook it.
The woman who was worried about her mate who was slow to arrive and come into the house says, "Your nose is too much which causes people to be very worried."
I pray that out of his glorious riches he may strengthen you with power through his Spirit in your inner being,
I knew that you always hear me, but I said this for the benefit of the people standing here, that they may believe that you sent me."
So then, he who marries the virgin does right, but he who does not marry her does better.
and called out, “Stand up on your feet!” At that, the man jumped up and began to walk.
affect
What then shall we say? That the Gentiles, who did not pursue righteousness, have obtained it, a righteousness that is by faith;
Even one of their own prophets has said, "Cretans are always liars, evil brutes, lazy gluttons."
“I have told you this, so that when their time comes you will remember that I warned you about them. I did not tell you this from the beginning because I was with you.”
Truly I tell you, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
Term of address to a boy, or a fellow younger than oneself.
Then he said to them, “Now draw some out and take it to the master of the banquet.” They did so,
When Christ, who is your life, appears, then you also will appear with him in glory.
There is power in the lightning because it is able to set trees on fire.
Now this was John’s testimony when the Jewish leaders in Jerusalem sent priests and Levites to ask him who he was.
but the word of the Lord stands forever." And this is the word that was preached to you.
close, as a flower in the afternoon
And the twenty-four elders, who were seated on their thrones before God, fell on their faces and worshiped God,
The child grows fast.
But you are not to be like that. Instead, the greatest among you should be like the youngest, and the one who rules like the one who serves.
David said about him: ‘I saw the Lord always before me. Because he is at my right hand, I will not be shaken.
and saying, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.”
The Jews then responded to him, “What sign can you show us to prove your authority to do all this?”
Then those who were in the boat worshiped him, saying, “Truly you are the Son of God.”
In his humiliation he was deprived of justice. Who can speak of his descendants? For his life was taken from the earth.”
Now a man who was lame from birth was being carried to the temple gate called Beautiful, where he was put every day to beg from those going into the temple courts.
What I tell you in the dark, speak in the daylight; what is whispered in your ear, proclaim from the roofs.
Pull camotes up by the roots
Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
Knowledge
You belong to your father, the devil, and you want to carry out your father's desire. He was a murderer from the beginning, not holding to the truth, for there is no truth in him. When he lies, he speaks his native language, for he is a liar and the father of lies.
hull
I have been claimed by that person; he regards me as his younger brother
You make your talk consistent with ours.
rubber
“However, the Most High does not live in houses made by human hands. As the prophet says:
His affection for someone has become focused (lit. arranged). As for that affection, there is just one girl whom he loves. That is the source of his getting married [to her].
happen
After a little while, those standing there went up to Peter and said, “Surely you are one of them; your accent gives you away.”
When the Pharisee who had invited him saw this, he said to himself, “If this man were a prophet, he would know who is touching him and what kind of woman she is—that she is a sinner.”
nudge someone with an elbow
To slurp; sip or drink something noisily, such as soup.
As for that saw, it was a year before it returned to me because it ended up in Kapugi.
?
I am the bread of life.
husked rice; raw, half-cooked rice
be hidden from sight, as in a flood
To work hard
Then Nathanael declared, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God; you are the king of Israel.”
There was a plot afoot among both Gentiles and Jews, together with their leaders, to mistreat them and stone them.
Glance
emulate
Then people brought little children to Jesus for him to place his hands on them and pray for them. But the disciples rebuked them.
form of red, malleable clay soil which is suitable for making clay pots.
At this point Festus interrupted Paul's defense. "You are out of your mind, Paul!" he shouted. "Your great learning is driving you insane."
whitest
increase
to exchange for a like kind; to replace
Then he said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” So he stretched it out and it was completely restored, just as sound as the other.
The believers immediately sent Paul to the coast, but Silas and Timothy stayed at Berea.
To move next to
Those beetles are the same size, one and a half inches in length.
scratch, as in dirt like a chicken
It was for the sake of the Name that they went out, receiving no help from the pagans.
We were given a free gift of eggs.
We test the water by touching it with our finger [to see] whether the warmth is just right.
lie on one’s stomach
The city was laid out like a square, as long as it was wide. He measured the city with the rod and found it to be 12,000 stadia in length, and as wide and high as it is long.
In addition, we are sending with them our brother who has often proved to us in many ways that he is zealous, and now even more so because of his great confidence in you.
To those who by persistence in doing good seek glory, honor and immortality, he will give eternal life.
Slither, as a snake or a creeping vine
Meaning.
Greet one another with a kiss of love. Peace to all of you who are in Christ.
and was designated by God to be high priest in the order of Melchizedek.
hang up by rope or string
For the message of the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing,  but to us who are being saved it is the power of God.
To swing baby in swing
It is like a mustard seed, which a man took and planted in his garden. It grew and became a tree, and the birds of the air perched in its branches."
Remember; think about as when friends will be separated and don’t want to be forgotten
Do you not know that he who unites himself with a prostitute is one with her in body? For it is said, “The two will become one flesh.”
To wrap oneself (in blanket)
Nor are you to be called instructors, for you have one Instructor, the Messiah.
I have the hiccups.
If you know that he is righteous, you know that everyone who does what is right has been born of him.
To be called on by a dove (bad omen)
The same thing happened to the second and third brother, right on down to the seventh.  Finally, the woman died.
There was a person who got a bonanza of a large amount of fish which he caught with a net.
“But Rabbi,” they said, “a short while ago the Jews there tried to stone you, and yet you are going back?”
resist being cut
break open
pound rice with short, quick strokes to poke around in the ground with a stick
Jab
The abu-on [bird], isn't so white; [it's color] is mixed.
love charm
"Woe to you, because you build tombs for the prophets, and it was your forefathers who killed them.
We loved you so much that we were delighted to share with you not only the gospel of God but our lives as well, because you had become so dear to us.
I will chose a wider house if no one is living [
Though I am free and belong to no one, I have made myself a slave to everyone, to win as many as possible.
When the wine was gone, Jesus’ mother said to him, “They have no more wine.”
You adulterous people, don't you know that friendship with the world is hatred toward God? Anyone who chooses to be a friend of the world becomes an enemy of God.
always giving thanks to God the Father for everything, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Relate
to close eyelids, especially in lullabies
He fetched the saw and returned it to me.
Moreover, the Father judges no one, but has entrusted all judgment to the Son,
Although I am less than the least of all the Lord’s people, this grace was given to me: to preach to the Gentiles the boundless riches of Christ,
He replied, “I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.
No one has seen the Father except the one who is from God; only he has seen the Father.
He repeatedly takes away the wives of other people.
So it is with you. Unless you speak intelligible words with your tongue, how will anyone know what you are saying? You will just be speaking into the air.
But he answered, "You give them something to eat." They said to him, "That would take eight months of a man's wages ! Are we to go and spend that much on bread and give it to them to eat?"
As for a person who is angry, he/she hates [someone]and he will be at enmity toward his companion.
and all are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that came by Jesus Christ.
Therefore, my brothers, you whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, that is how you should stand firm in the Lord, dear friends!
A large amount of something sliced and set out to dry
offend
“No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of my own accord. I have authority to lay it down and authority to take it up again. This command I received from my Father.”
To get sore thighs from walking
In a similar way, Sodom and Gomorrah and the surrounding towns gave themselves up to sexual immorality and perversion. They serve as an example of those who suffer the punishment of eternal fire.
Who then is the one who condemns? No one. Christ Jesus who died—more than that, who was raised to life—is at the right hand of God and is also interceding for us.
“No one, sir,” she said. “Then neither do I condemn you,” Jesus declared. “Go now and leave your life of sin.”
The piglet butts up against the tits so that the milk will become greater.
High water
walk
"Do you speak Greek?" he replied. "Aren't you the Egyptian who started a revolt and led four thousand terrorists out into the desert some time ago?"
because a friend of mine on a journey has come to me, and I have nothing to set before him.'
"That servant who knows his master's will and does not get ready or does not do what his master wants will be beaten with many blows.
To feel peaceful; to have a clear conscience.
A fistful is taking a large handful of food.
The one who plants and the one who waters have one purpose, and they will each be rewarded according to their own labor.
dry something in the sun
“All these I have kept since I was a boy,” he said.
There is something which they burn as a means of treatment to remove that love charm.
Who will bring any charge against those whom God has chosen? It is God who justifies.
third right string of kobbiung
The path of the highway which goes to Sinuda, it is always twisting and turning.
"No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up at the last day
cheer
skinny
But even if I am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and service coming from your faith, I am glad and rejoice with all of you.
From that time on Jesus began to preach, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.”
As the crowds increased, Jesus said, "This is a wicked generation. It asks for a miraculous sign, but none will be given it except the sign of Jonah.
A bird hops when it steps with both feet as it moves around.
The person who slaughters a pig by cutting its throat, he cuts open the stomach because he will remove its intestines.
cassava
To have a secret.
low weeds with tiny yellow flowers
about twelve o'clock.
To float partially submerged like flotsam such as dead and dying fish
Cobra
Waist
conjunctivitis (red, pus-filled eye condition)
Then Paul left the synagogue and went next door to the house of Titius Justus, a worshiper of God.
stand still
But Martha was distracted by all the preparations that had to be made. She came to him and asked, “Lord, don’t you care that my sister has left me to do the work by myself? Tell her to help me!”
The famine arrived.
When the men came to Jesus, they said, “John the Baptist sent us to you to ask, ‘Are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?’”
And even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled to those who are perishing.
If I have a problem, I am not afraid to ask for help.
He wrote a letter as follows:
kind of taro with red stalks
Greet Philologus, Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas and all the saints with them.
This is a lake that has no outlet for the water.
I’ll relate this story/information to you.
After this I looked and there before me was a great multitude that no one could count, from every nation, tribe, people and language, standing before the throne and in front of the Lamb. They were wearing white robes and were holding palm branches in their hands.
Short
It got wet some time ago.
ransom
metal grate or platform on the hearth for setting pots on
prostitute
When he gave the letter [to me], he instructed (lit. caused) [me] to add to it by word of mouth to insure that [the person] would set aside some corn [for him].
deep sound, low note
“the Spirit of truth. The world cannot accept him, because it neither sees him nor knows him. But you know him, for he lives with you and will be in you.”
“Where is your faith?” he asked his disciples. In fear and amazement they asked one another, “Who is this? He commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him.”
To tie together.
In those days Peter stood up among the believers (a group numbering about a hundred and twenty)
Then the man said, "Lord, I believe," and he worshiped him.
deliberately forget or ignore
sugarcane having a greyish pattern.
Homophone (to share the same name)
She would say that her rice will be wasted because she cannot finish weeding
What she was sewing was completed.
who comforts us in all our troubles, so that we can comfort those in any trouble with the comfort we ourselves receive from God.
My uncle had [me] point out where to cut.
originate
feel with tongue or fingers.
but his mother spoke up and said, “No! He is to be called John.”
kind of small thin banana
He has filled the hungry with good things but has sent the rich away empty.
I'm going to move to some other place for a while.
Airplane
They all gave out of their wealth; but she, out of her poverty, put in everything--all she had to live on."
Anyone who loves their father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; anyone who loves their son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
Jesus knew what they were thinking and asked, “Why are you thinking these things in your hearts?
youngest child in a family
The third angel poured out his bowl on the rivers and springs of water, and they became blood.
Everyone who competes in the games goes into strict training. They do it to get a crown that will not last; but we do it to get a crown that will last forever.
and for many days he was seen by those who had traveled with him from Galilee to Jerusalem. They are now his witnesses to our people.
When a tree sheds its leaves, the leaves drop off when the wind blows against them.
“Come,” he replied, “and you will see.” So they went and saw where he was staying, and they spent that day with him. It was about four in the afternoon.
Then the angel I had seen standing on the sea and on the land raised his right hand to heaven.
"Go to the village ahead of you, and as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there, which no one has ever ridden. Untie it and bring it here.
The fish are being trapped by impeding the flow of the water.
If a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
I’ll use the scraps for patching
The law is not based on faith; on the contrary, it says, “The person who does these things will live by them.”
encase
We have heard that some went out from us without our authorization and disturbed you, troubling your minds by what they said.
In the Law it is written: "Through men of strange tongues and through the lips of foreigners I will speak to this people, but even then they will not listen to me," says the Lord.
So those who rely on faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith.
So too, at the present time there is a remnant chosen by grace.
This is the genealogy of Jesus the Messiah the son of David, the son of Abraham:
whom he poured out on us generously through Jesus Christ our Savior,
To be spread out (circular or with discernable boundary)
tell a story
Their bodies are [destructively] affected [by what they do]
But I did not want to do anything without your consent, so that any favor you do will be spontaneous and not forced.
Gossip.
grab
To be jealous.
When you are persecuted in one place, flee to another. Truly I tell you, you will not finish going through the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.
curse
We prepare ourselves ahead of time. It's as if we have had an intuitive warning.
A person who has a uvula, he is able to talk.
To side-step something such as an order.
It is written in Isaiah the prophet: "I will send my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way"
I care very little if I am judged by you or by any human court; indeed, I do not even judge myself.
Does God give you his Spirit and work miracles among you because you observe the law, or because you believe what you heard?
All inhabitants of the earth will worship the beast—all whose names have not been written in the Lamb’s book of life, the Lamb who was slain from the creation of the world.
He was accompanied by Nicodemus, the man who earlier had visited Jesus at night. Nicodemus brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about seventy-five pounds.
put the ladder out from the house so dogs or children won’t enter.
Jesus entered Jerusalem and went to the temple. He looked around at everything, but since it was already late, he went out to Bethany with the Twelve.
If a person has great authority or great knowledge, he/she is called a great person.
hen
It’s improbable that we would get it since we’re women.
so that you may eat the flesh of kings, generals, and the mighty, of horses and their riders, and the flesh of all people, free and slave, great and small.”
different fathers
would
How is it you don’t understand that I was not talking to you about bread? But be on your guard against the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
Andì will give something to us without charge.
Eggplant.
"In contrast to" something else (Tigwanan dialect for atag)
“King Agrippa, I consider myself fortunate to stand before you today as I make my defense against all the accusations of the Jews,
release a horse into pasture to choose what it will eat
Pestle with a carved top
To hold something in one's mouth
Be shepherds of God’s flock that is under your care, watching over them—not because you must, but because you are willing, as God wants you to be; not pursuing dishonest gain, but eager to serve;
To let or allow someone to do something.
Peace and mercy to all who follow this rule, even to the Israel of God.
Let no one in the field go back to get their cloak.
take a knee-chest position, turn bottom-up
A wooden pole fastened between two sturdy trees (part of a pig trap)
Pour out the corn which you will dry.
For this reason I remind you to fan into flame the gift of God, which is in you through the laying on of my hands.
So then, death is at work in us, but life is at work in you.
Canoe.
For I am already being poured out like a drink offering, and the time for my departure is near.
You are still worldly. For since there is jealousy and quarreling among you, are you not worldly? Are you not acting like mere humans?
fast
Call me.
He went into all the country around the Jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
Before the coming of Jesus, John preached repentance and baptism to all the people of Israel.
Meanwhile, Saul was still breathing out murderous threats against the Lord’s disciples. He went to the high priest
Therefore, since the promise of entering his rest still stands, let us be careful that none of you be found to have fallen short of it.
following
On the contrary, when he was in Rome, he searched hard for me until he found me.
When something gleams like gold, its glint is beautiful.
Blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy.
Then the father realized that this was the exact time at which Jesus had said to him, “Your son will live.” So he and his whole household believed.
Greet one another with a holy kiss.
Type of sugarcane.
pointer
She had to sit/ kneel ?? because she was crippled.
The Scripture foresaw that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, and announced the gospel in advance to Abraham: "All nations will be blessed through you."
A strong wind was blowing and the waters grew rough.
Some Pharisees came and tested him by asking, "Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?"
Do I mean then that a sacrifice offered to an idol is anything, or that an idol is anything?
I do not understand what I do. For what I want to do I do not do, but what I hate I do.
To think over, to think about something
A great and wondrous sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet and a crown of twelve stars on her head.
The chief priests picked up the coins and said, “It is against the law to put this into the treasury, since it is blood money.”
Truly I tell you, it will be more bearable for Sodom and Gomorrah on the day of judgment than for that town.
full moon
Noise when walking on bamboo floor
So what shall I do? I will pray with my spirit, but I will also pray with my mind; I will sing with my spirit, but I will also sing with my mind.
honeycomb
Finally, brothers and sisters, rejoice! Strive for full restoration, encourage one another, be of one mind, live in peace. And the God of love and peace will be with you.
So then, let us not be like others, who are asleep, but let us be awake and sober.
Those who are harvesting are being rushed so that [the harvesting] will soon be finished.
give without charge
If it is burned up, he will suffer loss; he himself will be saved, but only as one escaping through the flames.
tenth
To those who sold doves he said, “Get these out of here! Stop turning my Father’s house into a market!”
Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You build tombs for the prophets and decorate the graves of the righteous.
grow up
In fact, though by this time you ought to be teachers, you need someone to teach you the elementary truths of God’s word all over again. You need milk, not solid food!
I will move to another place for a while.
If someone visits from Kapalong, they meet us at the junction so that they can find our house and won’t repeatedly get lost.
When they came to Jesus, they saw the man who had been possessed by the legion of demons, sitting there, dressed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
and they knew nothing about what would happen until the flood came and took them all away. That is how it will be at the coming of the Son of Man.
Die
Line on one’s palm
"I tell you the truth, I will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God."
The collector, that is the person who collects payment for the horse.
Everyone who has this hope in him purifies himself, just as he is pure.
Yet when planted, it grows and becomes the largest of all garden plants, with such big branches that the birds of the air can perch in its shade."
you were bought at a price. Therefore honor God with your body.
You have taken up the tabernacle of Molek and the star of your god Rephan, the idols you made to worship. Therefore I will send you into exile’ beyond Babylon.
curl of hair
sacroiliac
Then he left them, got back into the boat and crossed to the other side.
Suddenly a sound like the blowing of a violent wind came from heaven and filled the whole house where they were sitting.
Two men will be in the field; one will be taken and the other left.  “Where, Lord?” they asked. He replied, “Where there is a dead body, there the vultures will gather.”
Now Herod had arrested John and bound him and put him in prison because of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife,  for John had been saying to him: “It is not lawful for you to have her.”  Herod wanted to kill John, but he was afraid of the people, because they considered him a prophet.
ascend
To sandwich
But even the archangel Michael, when he was disputing with the devil about the body of Moses, did not dare to bring a slanderous accusation against him, but said, "The Lord rebuke you!"
Yet because I tell the truth, you do not believe me!
Don’t give the clothing out on credit.
When ghosts try to scare us, at first they say, “Mmm.” After that, they make things drop in front of us.
get tired of
Abraham reasoned that God could raise the dead, and figuratively speaking, he did receive Isaac back from death.
he exerted when he raised Christ from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly realms,
New moon phase.
People make holes on purpose, as outhouses or for garbage.
His head and hair were white like wool, as white as snow, and his eyes were like blazing fire.
He is dressed in a robe dipped in blood, and his name is the Word of God.
to cause or predict bad luck
Was the field burned completely
Jesus turned and said to them, "Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me; weep for yourselves and for your children.
They answered him, "We are Abraham's descendants and have never been slaves of anyone. How can you say that we shall be set free?"
tightly braid three, four, or six strands
kind of bangkawan used to carry a wild rooster
Thus you nullify the word of God by your tradition that you have handed down. And you do many things like that."
Person whose familiar spirit comes with the moon
Sing a lullaby
You offer it to me.
lengthen
that is what remains
To cure
Tie together to stabilize
King Herod heard about this, for Jesus' name had become well known. Some were saying, "John the Baptist has been raised from the dead, and that is why miraculous powers are at work in him."
We know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time.
The reason for our slowness to purchase the axe is because we will examine it to see whether it has a crack.
Ugalinga is their adoptive mother and her husband is their adoptive father.
"Or suppose a king is about to go to war against another king. Will he not first sit down and consider whether he is able with ten thousand men to oppose the one coming against him with twenty thousand?
rumbling sound
A room within a house or building
Greet all your leaders and all God's people. Those from Italy send you their greetings.
Let’s all of us pound
Leaf
Now those who had been scattered by the persecution that broke out when Stephen was killed traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus and Antioch, spreading the word only among Jews.
For by the grace given me I say to every one of you: Do not think of yourself more highly than you ought, but rather think of yourself with sober judgment, in accordance with the faith God has distributed to each of you.
Then Jesus said to them, "How is it that they say the Christ is the Son of David?
On my account you will be brought before governors and kings as witnesses to them and to the Gentiles.
become reddish
peaceful feeling
Do you not know, brothers and sisters—for I am speaking to those who know the law—that the law has authority over someone only as long as that person lives?
Then the apostles returned to Jerusalem from the hill called the Mount of Olives, a Sabbath day’s walk from the city.
It took my place
Then the end will come, when he hands over the kingdom to God the Father after he has destroyed all dominion, authority and power.
The master commended the dishonest manager because he had acted shrewdly. For the people of this world are more shrewd in dealing with their own kind than are the people of the light.
To punch, hit with base of fist
to make murky or opaque (as of water)
left
The city clerk quieted the crowd and said: "Men of Ephesus, doesn't all the world know that the city of Ephesus is the guardian of the temple of the great Artemis and of her image, which fell from heaven?
When Jesus heard that John had been put in prison, he withdrew to Galilee.
And you have forgotten that word of encouragement that addresses you as sons: "My son, do not make light of the Lord's discipline, and do not lose heart when he rebukes you,
His master replied, ‘You wicked, lazy servant! So you knew that I harvest where I have not sown and gather where I have not scattered seed?
pound
It is still new material.
After the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb.
“My food,” said Jesus, “is to do the will of him who sent me and to finish his work.
stove
rolling rushing water, current
but when perfection comes, the imperfect disappears.
Let no one on the roof of his house go down or enter the house to take anything out.
Some Jews who went around driving out evil spirits tried to invoke the name of the Lord Jesus over those who were demon-possessed. They would say, “In the name of the Jesus whom Paul preaches, I command you to come out.”
His disciples answered, “Where could we get enough bread in this remote place to feed such a crowd?”
For I testify that they gave as much as they were able, and even beyond their ability. Entirely on their own,
Beard on cheeks.
My parent-in-law made an agreement with me that I would live with my parent-in-laws for the duration of one year so that I could help [her] with her work.
Wives, in the same way be submissive to your husbands so that, if any of them do not believe the word, they may be won over without words by the behavior of their wives,
But the earth helped the woman by opening its mouth and swallowing the river that the dragon had spewed out of his mouth.
trying to find out the time and circumstances to which the Spirit of Christ in them was pointing when he predicted the sufferings of Christ and the glories that would follow.
The chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for false evidence against Jesus so that they could put him to death.
But godliness with contentment is great gain.
Make sure that nobody pays back wrong for wrong, but always strive to do what is good for each other and for everyone else.
Later, later on; but then; to turn out differently than expected.
So the disciples did as Jesus had directed them and prepared the Passover.
struggle against restraint
And anyone who does not carry his cross and follow me cannot be my disciple.
climb down
Late in the afternoon the Twelve came to him and said, “Send the crowd away so they can go to the surrounding villages and countryside and find food and lodging, because we are in a remote place here.”
Thinking he was in their company, they traveled on for a day. Then they began looking for him among their relatives and friends.
suckle
To whip
My nylon cord fell from the table and became tangled because it became dishevelled because it came off of the spool.
We believe and know that you are the Holy One of God."
When we are ill, [we] just expend great effort to get up. That is [the meaning] of managing because we force ourselves to do something
"What things?" he asked.
Wise
After three days they found him in the temple courts, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking them questions.
The Holy Spirit also testifies to us about this. First he says:
Jesus replied, “You are in error because you do not know the Scriptures or the power of God.
But his followers took him by night and lowered him in a basket through an opening in the wall.
When they have finished sacrificing the pig, they eat it.
Now John's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting. Some people came and asked Jesus, "How is it that John's disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees are fasting, but yours are not?"
In the same way the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders mocked him.
To part from
They don't have time to come for a visit because they have a lot of work.
Just bring the fragrant soap.
agreed
If we deliberately keep on sinning after we have received the knowledge of the truth, no sacrifice for sins is left,
"Where do you want us to prepare for it?" they asked.
Or do you think Scripture says without reason that the spirit he caused to live in us envies intensely?
Lean over
To spear, stab or cut in the same place
The [piece of] wood which is a lever, that is the thing used for leverage is put underneath
buoyant
Since many are boasting in the way the world does, I too will boast.
When his time of service was completed, he returned home.
And if you lend to those from whom you expect repayment, what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, expecting to be repaid in full.
Simon (whom he named Peter), his brother Andrew, James, John, Philip, Bartholomew,
embrace
Do not take revenge, my friends, but leave room for God's wrath, for it is written: "It is mine to avenge; I will repay," says the Lord.
As for the person who is quick to become  tired of his work, he will be slow to finish the house that he is making.
In him you were also circumcised, in the putting off of the sinful nature, not with a circumcision done by the hands of men but with the circumcision done by Christ,
join together, as villages
casually
When they heard him speak to them in Aramaic, they became very quiet. Then Paul said:
nymph stage of cicada
If we see someone to whom we are related (lit. companion) whom we have not yet met, we feel confident toward him. We feel an openness [between us]. We are able to trust him.
and said, ‘Cornelius, God has heard your prayer and remembered your gifts to the poor.
By calling this covenant "new," he has made the first one obsolete; and what is obsolete and aging will soon disappear.
As for the po-it fish [lit. creatures of the water which are po-it], its soup is good for the nursing mother because her breasts will produce milk.
The last of harvest
Our desire is not that others might be relieved while you are hard pressed, but that there might be equality.  At the present time your plenty will supply what they need, so that in turn their plenty will supply what you need. The goal is equality,
If for example we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done at the beginning is supplanted  And then we are distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish [what we started out to do].
Still others, like seed sown among thorns, hear the word;
Have someone treat you because this ailment is [from] witchcraft.
He longed to fill his stomach with the pods that the pigs were eating, but no one gave him anything.
capsize
Stir
They presented these men to the apostles, who prayed and laid their hands on them.
But the man who has doubts is condemned if he eats, because his eating is not from faith; and everything that does not come from faith is sin.
He himself was not the light; he came only as a witness to the light.
Next
All domesticated animals have hips but chickens don't because their legs are attached to their sides.
A kind of black rice.
And the news about him spread throughout the surrounding area.
He says, “I will declare your name to my brothers and sisters; in the assembly I will sing your praises.”
Now the Feast of Unleavened Bread, called the Passover, was approaching,
The men of Nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and now something greater than Jonah is here.
Don’t go alone, because there are many raiders.
Soft spot on baby's head (fontanel)
One large fistful of something, especially food
if you are convinced that you are a guide for the blind, a light for those who are in the dark,
shark fin
For you have heard of my previous way of life in Judaism, how intensely I persecuted the church of God and tried to destroy it.
“Friends, why are you doing this? We too are only human, like you. We are bringing you good news, telling you to turn from these worthless things to the living God, who made the heavens and the earth and the sea and everything in them.
To rip
He called out to them, “Friends, haven’t you any fish?” “No,” they answered.
To enfold or wrap in leaves or corn husks for steaming.
What causes fights and quarrels among you? Don't they come from your desires that battle within you?
In our place, we don't show respect [to someone] unless they have been made a leader.
show something
When a person defecates, the fecal material passes through the anus.
This was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah: “He took up our infirmities and bore our diseases.”
The edge of the river which is flat in which reeds grow, that is soft soil ground.
Estimate the width.
She gave birth to a son, a male child, who will rule all the nations with an iron scepter. And her child was snatched up to God and to his throne.
Warrior.
cataracts
There was a person who placed a noose beside the nest of a dove. Then he shooed the dove and then the neck of the dove was caught in the noose because the noose tightened around its neck.
claim
bounce
"Stop grumbling among yourselves," Jesus answered.
He replied, "Whether he is a sinner or not, I don't know. One thing I do know. I was blind but now I see!"
which
I remember that which my father taught me about the work of sawing wood to make a house.
Really
They stood still, their faces downcast. One of them, named Cleopas, asked him, "Are you only a visitor to Jerusalem and do not know the things that have happened there in these days?"
And he has given him authority to judge because he is the Son of Man.
But they kept shouting, "Crucify him! Crucify him!"
Rapids of a river.
So Pilate decided to grant their demand.
On hearing this report, the captain of the temple guard and the chief priests were at a loss, wondering what this might lead to.
It would be great if the husband of Tuning knew how to make a rice granary, however, he doesn't
When you enter a house, first say, ‘Peace to this house.’
You are to abstain from food sacrificed to idols, from blood, from the meat of strangled animals and from sexual immorality. You will do well to avoid these things. Farewell.
But he said to them, "It is I; don't be afraid."
A powerful spirit being of higher order than the busow
frustrated
visitor, guest
He must not be a recent convert, or he may become conceited and fall under the same judgment as the devil.
The movement or quaking of an earthquake
Strike
Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to be baptized by John.
For the appeal we make does not spring from error or impure motives, nor are we trying to trick you.
small red chili peppers
name of a village in the Kapugi area
Immediately after the distress of those days ‘the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from the sky, and the heavenly bodies will be shaken.’
We do not want you to become lazy, but to imitate those who through faith and patience inherit what has been promised.
He gave him no inheritance here, not even enough ground to set his foot on. But God promised him that he and his descendants after him would possess the land, even though at that time Abraham had no child.
To have something thrown at oneself, as when playing dodge ball
If I fought wild beasts in Ephesus for merely human reasons, what have I gained? If the dead are not raised, "Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die."
When we are nauseated, we spit up our saliva, and if we have food we have eaten, then it will be vomited. If we are continually nauseated, we will repeatedly vomit up that which we have eaten.
I saw thrones on which were seated those who had been given authority to judge. And I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded because of their testimony about Jesus and because of the word of God. They had not worshiped the beast or its image and had not received its mark on their foreheads or their hands. They came to life and reigned with Christ a thousand years.
They replied, “Some say John the Baptist; others say Elijah; and still others, Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
We didn't rely on you.
Rejoice in the Lord always. I will say it again: Rejoice!
To find.
You need to persevere so that when you have done the will of God, you will receive what he has promised.
In the same way, I tell you, there is rejoicing in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner who repents."
Cat, either wild or tame
Just two
Downpayment
Attack and bite, of pig, dog, horse
A spirit who watches over the people of a place.
Reflect on what I am saying, for the Lord will give you insight into all this.
oldest
kick
kind of manika leaf chewed with betelnut
to dredge a river with leaves to get fish
Jesus replied, "Are you not in error because you do not know the Scriptures or the power of God?
Sudsuron ta ka mundù.
We boarded a ship from Adramyttium about to sail for ports along the coast of the province of Asia, and we put out to sea. Aristarchus, a Macedonian from Thessalonica, was with us.
So the other disciples told him, "We have seen the Lord!" But he said to them, "Unless I see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where the nails were, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe it."
cause an illness
that is, the mystery made known to me by revelation, as I have already written briefly.
Do not be carried away by all kinds of strange teachings. It is good for our hearts to be strengthened by grace, not by eating ceremonial foods, which is of no benefit to those who do so.
You choose yours.
Follow up the waxing with skating
He spread out the scattered stones as he arranged them because he raked them.
likely
abcesses
Isaiah cries out concerning Israel: “Though the number of the Israelites be like the sand by the sea, only the remnant will be saved.
Clear (as water)
To be far away from
offspring of a large animal
nor did we eat anyone’s food without paying for it. On the contrary, we worked night and day, laboring and toiling so that we would not be a burden to any of you.
If we have plants which are flowers, we will be careful when we step so that the flowers won't be accidentally stepped on.
This money is adequate for you to reach Davao.
height
Our [relationship to] our companion will develop when our fellowship is good.
Zerubbabel the father of Abihud, Abihud the father of Eliakim, Eliakim the father of Azor,
After many days had gone by, there was a conspiracy among the Jews to kill him,
Our pelvic bone pulls apart when we give birth.
Confessing their sins, they were baptized by him in the Jordan River.
Uncle made a mortar which was small but the mouth was spacious and deep.
But how he can see now, or who opened his eyes, we don't know. Ask him. He is of age; he will speak for himself."
If we have sown spiritual seed among you, is it too much if we reap a material harvest from you?
gentle and of good character
The moon has passed the zenith.
To suck
I write these things to you who believe in the name of the Son of God so that you may know that you have eternal life.
“As you know, the Passover is two days away—and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified.”
Kind of bird with blue flash colors & reddish breast; kingfisher.
cheesy substance on newborn’s skin
swim deeply underwater
For sin shall no longer be your master, because you are not under the law, but under grace.
The world cannot hate you, but it hates me because I testify that its works are evil.
But as he left, he promised, "I will come back if it is God's will." Then he set sail from Ephesus.
For those who are led by the Spirit of God are the children of God.
nor will people say, ‘Here it is,’ or ‘There it is,’ because the kingdom of God is in your midst.”
I do not want to seem to be trying to frighten you with my letters.
go in and out of a ladder
He then began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, chief priests and teachers of the law, and that he must be killed and after three days rise again.
The arms will be obstructed by the material if the sleeves are too narrow; they won’t fit.
That is what you deserve for being a child who doesn't obey
By his power God raised the Lord from the dead, and he will raise us also.
Not so with you. Instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,
It is for freedom that Christ has set us free. Stand firm, then, and do not let yourselves be burdened again by a yoke of slavery.
They still did not believe that he had been blind and had received his sight until they sent for the man’s parents.
The child repeatedly topples as it takes steps as it approaches its mother.
If then David calls him ‘Lord,’ how can he be his son?”
“You have said so,” Jesus replied. “But I say to all of you: From now on you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Mighty One and coming on the clouds of heaven.”
“You are the salt of the earth. But if the salt loses its saltiness, how can it be made salty again? It is no longer good for anything, except to be thrown out and trampled underfoot.
We tear off one piece of paper.
since what may be known about God is plain to them, because God has made it plain to them.
he sent them to the Lord to ask, “Are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?”
Now to you who believe, this stone is precious. But to those who do not believe, “The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone,”
I call God as my witness that it was in order to spare you that I did not return to Corinth.
sandpaper
Outer side
To pull out by roots.
As for soup/gravy in which starch has been added, it will become lumpy if it is not stirred.
call a person’s attention by calling whsst.
To live; be alive
To go up
Planting stick.
Then he went up and touched the bier they were carrying him on, and the bearers stood still. He said, “Young man, I say to you, get up!”
The word confront means to scold. The mother says, “Why didn't you-pl. help your father?”
Then Jesus, still teaching in the temple courts, cried out, "Yes, you know me, and you know where I am from. I am not here on my own, but he who sent me is true. You do not know him,
Change clothes
Remind the people to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient, to be ready to do whatever is good,
But the wisdom that comes from heaven is first of all pure; then peaceloving, considerate, submissive, full of mercy and good fruit, impartial and sincere.
“From this man’s descendants God has brought to Israel the Savior Jesus, as he promised.
He was in the world, and though the world was made through him, the world did not recognize him.
jiggle or bounce
“They are not of the world, even as I am not of it.”
Base of a slope; foot of a mountain
fall apart
Slice into long thin pieces
And there was war in heaven. Michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon and his angels fought back.
and the tombs broke open. The bodies of many holy people who had died were raised to life.
Whoever has ears, let them hear.
and whoever lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?"
But if they will not listen, take one or two others along, so that ‘every matter may be established by the testimony of two or three witnesses.’
To make a channel or ditch.
To be bent over
Because of my chains, most of the brothers in the Lord have been encouraged to speak the word of God more courageously and fearlessly.
He who speaks on his own does so to gain honor for himself, but he who works for the honor of the one who sent him is a man of truth; there is nothing false about him.
it’s just a bit of fat that he has.
If the ground is on a downward incline, the water will flow.
"Now my heart is troubled, and what shall I say? 'Father, save me from this hour'? No, it was for this very reason I came to this hour.
The money from his bambamboo was used up by the person whom he had entrusted with responsibility [to sell it].
If a pregnant pig is rammed into by another pig, it will miscarry and that with which it was pregnant will be discharged.
[He] is rolling [his] eyes [up into his head]
Go to leaf and not bear fruit
And if anyone takes words away from this book of prophecy, God will take away from him his share in the tree of life and in the holy city, which are described in this book.
On coming to the house, they saw the child with his mother Mary, and they bowed down and worshiped him. Then they opened their treasures and presented him with gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh.
He didn't allow him to take half of those piglets.
Then, because so many people were coming and going that they did not even have a chance to eat, he said to them, "Come with me by yourselves to a quiet place and get some rest."
I have just now newly eaten supper.
We know that the law is good if one uses it properly.
He answered, "Have you never read what David did when he and his companions were hungry and in need?
They blindfolded him and demanded, "Prophesy! Who hit you?"
Jesus answered, “I tell you, not seven times, but seventy-seven times.
The mountain is sloping.
“Write, therefore, what you have seen, what is now and what will take place later.
Mangolian spot
stink bug
Sheathe your bolo.
People were also bringing babies to Jesus for him to place his hands on them. When the disciples saw this, they rebuked them.
Affix for irrealis, having various grammatical functions.
As for the present-day people who have come later, there is a custom to have an outhouse for defecating and so that is the only place people will go to to defecate.
They laughed at him, knowing that she was dead.
Peter said to him, "We have left everything to follow you!"
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision has any value. The only thing that counts is faith expressing itself through love
Arrow(s), or spear(s), [or] a spear trap are that which are used for hunting.
The angel swung his sickle on the earth, gathered its grapes and threw them into the great winepress of God's wrath.
he lamps when we sleep, we extinguish them.
Whatever he/she strongly desires, he/she buys it.
If you tie a chicken and it struggles, it will hop away.
Thorns are scraped off.
Their hair was messy from the rain.
So I will very gladly spend for you everything I have and expend myself as well. If I love you more, will you love me less?
In the past
The person whose horse was confiscated for a debt, yelled with a loud yell, "Why is it that I am the one from whom you take something for a debt when I have no debt to you?"
"Though I have been speaking figuratively, a time is coming when I will no longer use this kind of language but will tell you plainly about my Father.
Not that I am looking for a gift, but I am looking for what may be credited to your account.
"My children, I will be with you only a little longer. You will look for me, and just as I told the Jews, so I tell you now: Where I am going, you cannot come.
First, I will take your horse and then the next day you will go to my house and ask if I have anything to use as payment.
I always thank my God for you because of his grace given you in Christ Jesus.
refuse to eat, drink or move
All wrongdoing is sin, and there is sin that does not lead to death.
wiggle
kind of millet
Jesus said to them, “You will indeed drink from my cup, but to sit at my right or left is not for me to grant. These places belong to those for whom they have been prepared by my Father.”
and find out what pleases the Lord.
If you then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him!"
The watching of the older monkeys is turned around because surprisingly it is their offspring, [the] baby monkey, which is the one to watch out for them.
But for that very reason I was shown mercy so that in me, the worst of sinners, Christ Jesus might display his immense patience as an example for those who would believe in him and receive eternal life.
offer.
to be put into effect when the times reach their fulfillment—to bring unity to all things in heaven and on earth under Christ.
Remove
compete
even us, whom he also called, not only from the Jews but also from the Gentiles?
who will mock him and spit on him, flog him and kill him. Three days later he will rise."
Jesus answered, “I am the way and the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me.”
As for everyone who comes to me and hears my words and puts them into practice, I will show you what they are like.  They are like a man building a house, who dug down deep and laid the foundation on rock. When a flood came, the torrent struck that house but could not shake it, because it was well built.
Returning the third time, he said to them, "Are you still sleeping and resting? Enough! The hour has come. Look, the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Want
[As for] agot-ot soil, corn will not flourish [in it] The corn will be skinny.
This Melchizedek was king of Salem and priest of God Most High. He met Abraham returning from the defeat of the kings and blessed him,
He who does not love me will not obey my teaching. These words you hear are not my own; they belong to the Father who sent me.
clanmate
fast
Yet the news about him spread all the more, so that crowds of people came to hear him and to be healed of their sicknesses.
And so all Israel will be saved, as it is written: "The deliverer will come from Zion; he will turn godlessness away from Jacob.
Adhere, stick together
soft
attack
We’ll surround the wild pigs.
buck
For this very reason, make every effort to add to your faith goodness; and to goodness, knowledge;
Some fell on rocky places, where it did not have much soil. It sprang up quickly, because the soil was shallow.
"This is the covenant I will make with them after that time, says the Lord. I will put my laws in their hearts, and I will write them on their minds."
A teeter-totter.
To become blurry, as a computer screen
With the tongue we praise our Lord and Father, and with it we curse men, who have been made in God's likeness.
The head of a turtle is pulled back and inside its body.
Marmot's mound
But it is your custom for me to release to you one prisoner at the time of the Passover. Do you want me to release 'the king of the Jews'?"
wooden ear-plug
Chopped off
but Paul chose Silas and left, commended by the believers to the grace of the Lord.
We will pass [close to] the edge of the cliff.
That which we use to treat [crops] are plants, banga palm, fan palm, plants of the field, vines which are the treatments of plants.
Then Simeon blessed them and said to Mary, his mother: “This child is destined to cause the falling and rising of many in Israel, and to be a sign that will be spoken against,
Arrow(s), or spear(s), [or] a spear trap are that which are used for hunting.
and he said to his attendants, “This is John the Baptist; he has risen from the dead! That is why miraculous powers are at work in him.”
Chest used to store things.
If one uses the word "kun," he doesn’t yet depend on it as true.
When you have seen [each other] you tell [that person] that you will sleep together for a while because you have missed him/her
and then see
beg
scream.
tuck tail between legs
I will just be seven days downriver.
So the Pharisees said to one another, “See, this is getting us nowhere. Look how the whole world has gone after him!”
But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch, where they and many others taught and preached the word of the Lord.
Laugh unrestrainably with each other
Keeping a close watch on him, they sent spies, who pretended to be honest. They hoped to catch Jesus in something he said so that they might hand him over to the power and authority of the governor.
A hoop is made of rattan which is wound in and out into a circle which is tossed to roll and is caught with a thrust of a stick as the children play.
come together;
But I will stay on at Ephesus until Pentecost,
To have a boil form
So I find this law at work: Although I want to do good, evil is right there with me.
Taboo
to keep close to
to slap
To lay in wait to ambush a person.
And he was amazed at their lack of faith.
A kind of small fish
Nothing [bad] will happen to us.
You know what has happened throughout the province of Judea, beginning in Galilee after the baptism that John preached—
Dungus is green tobacco.  It’s name is salingsing.
Then Jesus asked them, "Which is lawful on the Sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill?" But they remained silent.
Man’s work for his mother-in-law before his marriage
“We are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and the teachers of the law. They will condemn him to death
cut trees for lumber
“My command is this: Love each other as I have loved you.”
After having anticipated for how many months as they were waiting to harvest, then they were not able to harvest [after all].
You watch in readiness to spear a fish and when one happens to get close, you spear it as you jab/thrust at it.
Type of shellfish found in fresh water
[The color of the abu-on bird resembles the color of ashes. It isn't quite white; its [color] is mixed.
They got up, drove him out of the town, and took him to the brow of the hill on which the town was built, in order to throw him off the cliff.
May the Lord show mercy to the household of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my chains.
And you are proud! Shouldn’t you rather have gone into mourning and have put out of your fellowship the man who has been doing this?
item of clothing (shirt, pants, dress)
black sugar ant.
duration
If anyone wants to be contentious about this, we have no other practice-- nor do the churches of God.
Black
wilt leaves so they don’t tear when wrapping food
for, “Everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”
seed
A single turn is just one curve.
They weren’t included
Glutton
What then shall we say, brothers? When you come together, everyone has a hymn, or a word of instruction, a revelation, a tongue or an interpretation. All of these must be done for the strengthening of the church.
Wander
But when they had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and had sat down together, Peter sat down with them.
Simon and his companions went to look for him,
to intentionally dismantle or take something apart
He told them this parable: "Look at the fig tree and all the trees. When they sprout leaves, you can see for yourselves and know that summer is near.
When he has become skilled, he will likewise use [that skill] to teach another person.
The glory and honor of the nations will be brought into it.
deer.
The meaning is unobstructed, correct and our understanding [of the words] is clear.
To my shame I admit that we were too weak for that! Whatever anyone else dares to boast about—I am speaking as a fool—I also dare to boast about.
Many of those who believed now came and openly confessed what they had done.
A kind of bird size of dove
Pattern your behaviour after his.
To cut or break off leaves from a plant such as the leaves of a banana or similar plant.
the mystery that has been kept hidden for ages and generations, but is now disclosed to the saints. To them God has chosen to make known among the Gentiles the glorious riches of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.
If a carabao crosses a large river, it will just be carried by the current.
Now the body is not made up of one part but of many.
transfer
Therefore, brothers and sisters, we are not children of the slave woman, but of the free woman.
A village on the Liboganon river just north of the mouth of the Kapugi river.
hand of bananas.
Truly I tell you, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.”
When the angels had left them and gone into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, “Let’s go to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has told us about.”
pestle used for pounding rice.
For if the inheritance depends on the law, then it no longer depends on the promise; but God in his grace gave it to Abraham through a promise.
Again he stooped down and wrote on the ground.
Blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
We want to avoid any criticism of the way we administer this liberal gift.
“I am the good shepherd; I know my sheep and my sheep know me—”
And do not swear by your head, for you cannot make even one hair white or black.
Retrieve food once cached away.
Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, let those in the city get out, and let those in the country not enter the city.
He did not need any testimony about mankind, for he knew what was in each person.
To be sprawled out on the ground (lifeless or unconscious)
When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting, the baby leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
And there were many in Israel with leprosy in the time of Elisha the prophet, yet not one of them was cleansed—only Naaman the Syrian.”
“What shall I do, then, with Jesus who is called the Messiah?” Pilate asked. They all answered, “Crucify him!”
When we plant yearly fields, we go to see how the corn fields are.
Your father Abraham rejoiced at the thought of seeing my day; he saw it and was glad."
"And now, compelled by the Spirit, I am going to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there.
We propagate the word of God.
"Brother will betray brother to death, and a father his child. Children will rebel against their parents and have them put to death.
I was at a loss how to investigate such matters; so I asked if he would be willing to go to Jerusalem and stand trial there on these charges.
of a woman with people skills, gifted and outgoing
to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus throughout all generations, for ever and ever! Amen.
For I was hungry and you gave me something to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you invited me in,
millet
in their effort to keep us from speaking to the Gentiles so that they may be saved. In this way they always heap up their sins to the limit. The wrath of God has come upon them at last.
And if I drive out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your people drive them out? So then, they will be your judges.
long edible grub (larva of black and red beetle)
The person said, “About the debt of the Kapugi people, it was a long time ago.”
Therefore I am sending you prophets and sages and teachers. Some of them you will kill and crucify; others you will flog in your synagogues and pursue from town to town.
and all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said to them.
Weevily rice.
We also know that the law is made not for the righteous but for lawbreakers and rebels, the ungodly and sinful, the unholy and irreligious, for those who kill their fathers or mothers, for murderers,
He released the man who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and murder, the one they asked for, and surrendered Jesus to their will.
But I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, makes her the victim of adultery, and anyone who marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
A piece of material or clothing held in each of one's hands during a dance.
I, Paul, write this greeting in my own hand. Remember my chains. Grace be with you.
that you may be children of your Father in heaven. He causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous.
Jesus replied: “‘Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.’
The beast, which you saw, once was, now is not, and will come up out of the Abyss and go to his destruction. The inhabitants of the earth whose names have not been written in the book of life from the creation of the world will be astonished when they see the beast, because he once was, now is not, and yet will come.
Jesus answered, "Can you make the guests of the bridegroom fast while he is with them?
If there’s any more scandal about you, you’ll be sold.
As she stood behind him at his feet weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears. Then she wiped them with her hair, kissed them and poured perfume on them.
Some of you have become arrogant, as if I were not coming to you.
Crippled, as of hand
Now as the church submits to Christ, so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything.
where he stayed until the death of Herod. And so was fulfilled what the Lord had said through the prophet: “Out of Egypt I called my son.”
First he said, "Sacrifices and offerings, burnt offerings and sin offerings you did not desire, nor were you pleased with them" (although the law required them to be made).
to dance swinging a piece of material in just one hand
Unripe; young, as of corn; immature.
woodpecker with red head
Then they asked him, “Where is your father?”
Try them on the children.
From Troas we put out to sea and sailed straight for Samothrace, and the next day we went on to Neapolis.
And the peace of God, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.
We split open the pula palm tree which we have notched and then we see many white grubs which are wiggling about.
Fine bits of metal
Just as Paul was about to speak, Gallio said to them, “If you Jews were making a complaint about some misdemeanor or serious crime, it would be reasonable for me to listen to you.
A kind of banana
All the neighbors were filled with awe, and throughout the hill country of Judea people were talking about all these things.
Then they came to Jericho. As Jesus and his disciples, together with a large crowd, were leaving the city, a blind man, Bartimaeus (that is, the Son of Timaeus), was sitting by the roadside begging.
I have spoken to you of earthly things and you do not believe; how then will you believe if I speak of heavenly things?
As Simon Peter stood warming himself, he was asked, "You are not one of his disciples, are you?" He denied it, saying, "I am not."
From the time that my child fell, she was moaning.  She said, “My whole body hurts.”
lift one's legs above waist while walking
“Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ,
As soon as all the people saw Jesus, they were overwhelmed with wonder and ran to greet him.
dirty
inform
show respect for someone who has died by being present at a wake.
If you are praising God with your spirit, how can one who finds himself among those who do not understand say "Amen" to your thanksgiving, since he does not know what you are saying?
Fish traps are aited with camote
drum with fingers
As it is written: “See, I lay in Zion a stone that causes people to stumble and a rock that makes them fall, and the one who believes in him will never be put to shame.”
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.”
The sun is bright (bursts forth).
When it is dry season, then the sunny period is prolonged and the creeks become puddles as they dry up from the dry weather.
"This is how it will be with anyone who stores up things for himself but is not rich toward God."
Didn’t it belong to you before it was sold? And after it was sold, wasn’t the money at your disposal? What made you think of doing such a thing? You have not lied just to human beings but to God.”
A fetish (for harvesting rice).
large fish hook used to catch carp, mudfish, or eels
Woe to you who are well fed now, for you will go hungry. Woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
Paul answered, "I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no ordinary city. Please let me speak to the people."
When Jesus entered Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred and asked, “Who is this?”
celebration
occupied
disappointed
Pound
When a child walks as he is playing and lifts his foot above his waist, his legs are also spread apart.
The moon is at its zenith.
Black dog
You did not give me a kiss, but this woman, from the time I entered, has not stopped kissing my feet.
News about him spread all over Syria, and people brought to him all who were ill with various diseases, those suffering severe pain, the demon-possessed, those having seizures, and the paralyzed; and he healed them.
Jesus replied, “Go back and report to John what you hear and see:  The blind receive sight, the lame walk, those who have leprosy are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the good news is proclaimed to the poor.  Blessed is anyone who does not stumble on account of me.”
imply
Come back to your senses as you ought, and stop sinning; for there are some who are ignorant of God--I say this to your shame.
Ear discharge (runny smell)
Papyrus
lift out
As for a guitar, it has six strings but a kuglung instrument only has two.
Facing
The disciples went and woke him, saying, “Lord, save us! We’re going to drown!”
They devoted themselves to the apostles’ teaching and to fellowship, to the breaking of bread and to prayer.
Anyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but anyone who speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the age to come.
After Herod had a thorough search made for him and did not find him, he cross-examined the guards and ordered that they be executed. Then Herod went from Judea to Caesarea and stayed there.
Wealthy
Those on the rocky ground are the ones who receive the word with joy when they hear it, but they have no root. They believe for a while, but in the time of testing they fall away.
We assumed this was [a good place] to pass however there were sharpened pieces of bamboo.
By faith Abel offered God a better sacrifice than Cain did. By faith he was commended as a righteous man, when God spoke well of his offerings. And by faith he still speaks, even though he is dead.
But some of them said, "Could not he who opened the eyes of the blind man have kept this man from dying?"
They were delighted and agreed to give him money.
The acts of the sinful nature are obvious: sexual immorality, impurity and debauchery;
side beam
Scar.
get out every last bit of food, or anything, from a container or bag.
Bald
Take my son aside to tell him where others won't hear that I will have him come home for a while when they have finished playing.
That which is thrown.
About that time she became sick and died, and her body was washed and placed in an upstairs room.
(as he said through his holy prophets of long ago),
forearm
It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile; it is thrown out. "He who has ears to hear, let him hear."
Eyelashes.
favored child who is not required to work
For as Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites, so also will the Son of Man be to this generation.
position of the sun around one o’clock in the afternoon
Therefore confess your sins to each other and pray for each other so that you may be healed. The prayer of a righteous man is powerful and effective.
kind of black rice
At that very hour there was a severe earthquake and a tenth of the city collapsed. Seven thousand people were killed in the earthquake, and the survivors were terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven.
We offend people
Thumb
If we confront [someone], we go to his house and there we will confront him. The [word] supmat is the same as that you are confronting (lit. facing) him because you speak to him.
Is any one of you in trouble? He should pray. Is anyone happy? Let him sing songs of praise.
When [the corn] flowers and bears ears, and if the flower(s) wilt, it indicates  that the corn is being blighted/diseased.
“He will glorify me because it is from me that he will receive what he will make known to you.”
headband or bound scarf of a man
Does not the very nature of things teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a disgrace to him,
For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon.’
They came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, with a request. "Sir," they said, "we would like to see Jesus."
To make someone blind
If he were on earth, he would not be a priest, for there are already priests who offer the gifts prescribed by the law.
Or do you not know that wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of God? Do not be deceived: Neither the sexually immoral nor idolaters nor adulterers nor men who have sex with men
Gold
Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.
He was one of our number and shared in our ministry.”
use it to swat blowflies.
The men would be enticed. In my opinion, that isn't appropriate.
stretch or hold out one’s hand
transfer from the palm of one person to that of another
I am afraid that when I come again my God will humble me before you, and I will be grieved over many who have sinned earlier and have not repented of the impurity, sexual sin and debauchery in which they have indulged.
That is why I am suffering as I am. Yet I am not ashamed, because I know whom I have believed, and am convinced that he is able to guard what I have entrusted to him for that day.
The second angel poured out his bowl on the sea, and it turned into blood like that of a dead person, and every living thing in the sea died.
used to help supply the bride price for another man’s son.
And I confer on you a kingdom, just as my Father conferred one on me,
If the ground is on a downward incline, the water will inadvertently flow.
The dead man sat up and began to talk, and Jesus gave him back to his mother.
For he says to Moses, “I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.”
We know that God does not listen to sinners. He listens to the godly man who does his will.
Then they understood that he was not telling them to guard against the yeast used in bread, but against the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Lipstick.
roll eyes
To produce shoots (as young rice).
What did he accomplish
"Woe to you, because you are like unmarked graves, which men walk over without knowing it."
Skinny; emaciated
Some of them, however, men from Cyprus and Cyrene, went to Antioch and began to speak to Greeks also, telling them the good news about the Lord Jesus.
There in Maambago there were those who were caused to plant corn. But later on, when it was time to harvest, those who sowed were not able to harvest
What does Scripture say? “Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness.”
Jesus said to him, "Today salvation has come to this house, because this man, too, is a son of Abraham.
Some were convinced by what he said, but others would not believe.
Both of you lift that which is heavy.
to condemn, pass judgement on
thresh grains or beans by trampling
“All that belongs to the Father is mine. That is why I said the Spirit will receive from me what he will make known to you.”
ignore
Our chickens all flocked around here earlier.
And a voice came from heaven: "You are my Son, whom I love; with you I am well pleased."
world
They were using this question as a trap, in order to have a basis for accusing him. But Jesus bent down and started to write on the ground with his finger.
They will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised to life.” And the disciples were filled with grief.
Then he gave Abraham the covenant of circumcision. And Abraham became the father of Isaac and circumcised him eight days after his birth. Later Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs.
There is a judge for the one who rejects me and does not accept my words; that very word which I spoke will condemn him at the last day.
In this way the word of the Lord spread widely and grew in power.
Large red biting ant (makes nests in trees, leaves, or ground)
But he gives us more grace. That is why Scripture says: "God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble."
haul downriver
When the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the pain.
Praise
Speak and act as those who are going to be judged by the law that gives freedom,
And I saw what looked like a sea of glass mixed with fire and, standing beside the sea, those who had been victorious over the beast and his image and over the number of his name. They held harps given them by God
It didn’t produce for us.
go around the outside of something
At once the man was cured; he picked up his mat and walked. The day on which this took place was a Sabbath,
that
poke the eyes
If anyone causes one of these little ones—those who believe in me—to stumble, it would be better for them to have a large millstone hung around their neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea.
give someone the willies
correct
He called you to this through our gospel, that you might share in the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
As for a chicken which is ill, its comb darkens.
Tin can used for cooking
Grown up
He called a little child to him, and placed the child among them.
We are not accustomed to those kinds of fish [lit. viand]. We are accustomed to having no [means of catching] fish.
to go off for a purpose; run an errand
Night insects
You screamed earlier on account of the sugar.
young lady
When he saw the crowds, he had compassion on them, because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.
and whoever wants to be first must be slave of all.
Wrist
The person who was cooking, he/she took a potholder which which to remove the lid of the pot because it was hot.
loosen
they love the place of honor at banquets and the most important seats in the synagogues;
If a man cleanses himself from the latter, he will be an instrument for noble purposes, made holy, useful to the Master and prepared to do any good work.
rattan
Grace be with you all.
But now I urge you to keep up your courage, because not one of you will be lost; only the ship will be destroyed.
kind of white rice
Tattoo marks on the body
After him, Judas the Galilean appeared in the days of the census and led a band of people in revolt. He too was killed, and all his followers were scattered.
"Do you see all these great buildings?" replied Jesus. "Not one stone here will be left on another; every one will be thrown down."
On the last and greatest day of the Feast, Jesus stood and said in a loud voice, "If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink.
Paul said, “John’s baptism was a baptism of repentance. He told the people to believe in the one coming after him, that is, in Jesus.”
Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
"You do not know me or my Father," Jesus replied. "If you knew me, you would know my Father also." He spoke these words while teaching in the temple area near the place where the offerings were put. Yet no one seized him, because his time had not yet come.
And they crucified him. Dividing up his clothes, they cast lots to see what each would get.
From this time many of his disciples turned back and no longer followed him.
This made the Jews ask, "Will he kill himself? Is that why he says, 'Where I go, you cannot come'?"
There we found some brothers who invited us to spend a week with them. And so we came to Rome.
Stare at each other
inside or hold of a boat or dugout canoe
reach out and take
But the centurion, instead of listening to what Paul said, followed the advice of the pilot and of the owner of the ship.
On reaching the place, he said to them, "Pray that you will not fall into temptation."
Obey your leaders and submit to their authority. They keep watch over you as men who must give an account. Obey them so that their work will be a joy, not a burden, for that would be of no advantage to you.
and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.
Then he said to his disciples, “The harvest is plentiful but the workers are few.
The blanket is harbor for body lice because it’s fuzzy.
flashlight
rise
The children of your chosen sister send their greetings.
stop bearing
As for a person who eats a lot, someone would say, "This person is too much who has nothing else to do than to be always eating.
When someone sings oggung style, the one who sings to an accompaniment is the same one who plays the saluroy instrument.
Do everything without complaining or arguing,
If we are taking someone into custody, we say, “Don’t resist because you are caught and already surrounded.”
dove
For since death came through a man, the resurrection of the dead comes also through a man.
and the master of the banquet tasted the water that had been turned into wine. He did not realize where it had come from, though the servants who had drawn the water knew. Then he called the bridegroom aside
sleep outside on the ground
cut off straight across
Therefore, get rid of all moral filth and the evil that is so prevalent and humbly accept the word planted in you, which can save you.
Mouth
that is, that you and I may be mutually encouraged by each other’s faith.
Uncircumcised
call a chicken with "kuru-kuru"
Don’t be in physical contact with me because you will catch my illness.
"After an absence of several years, I came to Jerusalem to bring my people gifts for the poor and to present offerings.
After he said this, he showed them his hands and side. The disciples were overjoyed when they saw the Lord.
This happened so that the words he had spoken would be fulfilled: “I have not lost one of those you gave me.”
In the time of Herod king of Judea there was a priest named Zechariah, who belonged to the priestly division of Abijah; his wife Elizabeth was also a descendant of Aaron.
Yet at the same time many even among the leaders believed in him. But because of the Pharisees they would not confess their faith for fear they would be put out of the synagogue;
attend.
But a poor widow came and put in two very small copper coins, worth only a fraction of a penny.
borrow
Last of all, he sent his son to them. ‘They will respect my son,’ he said.
It's like Ann Joy whose illness was difficult. We lost hope because she could no longer live.
until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.”’
suffer injury or accident
Is any one of you sick? He should call the elders of the church to pray over him and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord.
since there is only one God, who will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through that same faith.
A person hesitates to speak because he is shy to talk to his companion if he has something he needs.
owl
The child took three steps.
I will just be the one from whom you will collect payment
A large 2-string instrument like a kuglung
He exercised all the authority of the first beast on his behalf, and made the earth and its inhabitants worship the first beast, whose fatal wound had been healed.
Carp fish don’t give birth to multiple offspring until the moon comes out.
Therefore, strengthen your feeble arms and weak knees.
Everyone with me sends you greetings. Greet those who love us in the faith. Grace be with you all.
Their two stomachs were touching (lit. kissing) each other.
Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of God.
for the meaning of something to be clear
Bandiling is sobbing
Dawn
and repentance and forgiveness of sins will be preached in his name to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
For here we do not have an enduring city, but we are looking for the city that is to come.
In this way, love is made complete among us so that we will have confidence on the day of judgment, because in this world we are like him.
being confident of this, that he who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of Christ Jesus.
I won’t give to you because there isn’t enough for one each.
You yourselves know that these hands of mine have supplied my own needs and the needs of my companions.
have a network of connections
Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, descended from David. This is my gospel,
At that time if anyone says to you, 'Look, here is the Christ !' or, 'Look, there he is!' do not believe it.
straight cut
search
arrange neatly
The next year the [amount of] corn was enough that it could be sold.
recover
five
The locusts looked like horses prepared for battle. On their heads they wore something like crowns of gold, and their faces resembled human faces.
When they heard this, they praised God. Then they said to Paul: “You see, brother, how many thousands of Jews have believed, and all of them are zealous for the law.”
small goose
We have confidence in the Lord that you are doing and will continue to do the things we command.
Kind of red rice; to crack or break incompletely.
And I saw an angel standing in the sun, who cried in a loud voice to all the birds flying in midair, "Come, gather together for the great supper of God,
At that time many will turn away from the faith and will betray and hate each other,
We are just temporary residents here on the earth.
"Woe to you experts in the law, because you have taken away the key to knowledge. You yourselves have not entered, and you have hindered those who were entering."
If you can manage [to heal] my body which has sores, remove them so that it will become well.
Wait a minute because I will put my shoes on next.
When we taste it and we can discern that the flavor of the broth of the pig is just right , it has become flavorful.
The word of the Lord spread through the whole region.
He will bring you a message through which you and all your household will be saved.’
"The son said to him, 'Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son. '
The crowds that went ahead of him and those that followed shouted, “Hosanna to the Son of David!” “Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!” “Hosanna in the highest heaven!”
protrude, as in a pregnant belly
You leave my things alone.
Fish palm [tree]
Go! I am sending you out like lambs among wolves.
Humble yourselves before the Lord, and he will lift you up.
It’s not possible for the plane to come here because it’s broken.
Many people spread their cloaks on the road, while others spread branches they had cut in the fields.
Kind of red rice
No one who wants to become a public figure acts in secret. Since you are doing these things, show yourself to the world."
old worn-out basket
"What then will the owner of the vineyard do to them? He will come and kill those tenants and give the vineyard to others." When the people heard this, they said, "May this never be!"
If there are a lot of dirty spider webs, we brush off the webs (lit. houses) of the spiders so that they will be removed. When we brush them off, the debris drops to the floor.
Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother,
Whole group
Because of the service by which you have proved yourselves, men will praise God for the obedience that accompanies your confession of the gospel of Christ, and for your generosity in sharing with them and with everyone else.
For a long time
A person gets a piece of bamboo the size of that used for poling and that is what he splits in half.
to give attention to something
burrow made by a person or animal
We who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak and not to please ourselves.
When the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy. They began to contradict what Paul was saying and heaped abuse on him.
If we are burning a field and the wind is strong, there will be a lot of embers that leap up and over to another mountain, which will also catch fire.
Even the ghosts, they moan because they are trying to scare us.
The soul hasn’t yet been reunited with the body; it’s bad luck
A person in the mountains calls water which is swift, mabonbon (“strong”).
deceive
A single item
Praying mantis
Fine toothed comb
radiate
hail (lit. "hail of rain")
Anyone who does wrong will be repaid for his wrong, and there is no favoritism.
graze, as spear or bullet
A huge fish or long teeth
Philip answered him, "It would take more than half a year's wages to buy enough bread for each one to have a bite!"
Immediately he spoke to them and said, "Take courage! It is I. Don't be afraid." Then he climbed into the boat with them, and the wind died down. They were completely amazed,
Altogether there were 276 of us on board.
patient; sick person
“You may ask me for anything in my name, and I will do it.”
Shoreline.
The woman with high status is what a woman is called who is a leader with respect to her conduct because she knows how to teach and to settle cases.
“As long as it is day, we must do the works of him who sent me. Night is coming, when no one can work.”
And he kept on preaching in the synagogues of Judea.
He said, “Throw your net on the right side of the boat and you will find some.” When they did, they were unable to haul the net in because of the large number of fish.
"Why? What crime has he committed?" asked Pilate. But they shouted all the louder, "Crucify him!"
But the angel said to them, “Do not be afraid. I bring you good news that will cause great joy for all the people.
May our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father, who loved us and by his grace gave us eternal encouragement and good hope,  encourage your hearts and strengthen you in every good deed and word.
a man’s enemies will be the members of his own household.’
If someone wants to get married, he will pursue it relentlessly. He will keep on discussing it with the father until he says yes.
large hard bamboo
We are fools for Christ, but you are so wise in Christ! We are weak, but you are strong! You are honored, we are dishonored!
“When he has brought out all his own, he goes on ahead of them, and his sheep follow him because they know his voice.”
All who sin apart from the law will also perish apart from the law, and all who sin under the law will be judged by the law.
rescue
to talk baby talk to a baby or pet
Purchase transaction
“You stiff-necked people! Your hearts and ears are still uncircumcised. You are just like your ancestors: You always resist the Holy Spirit!
Then they spoke the word of the Lord to him and to all the others in his house.
to complete
call one’s dog from a distance
If you acknowledge me as your companion, you also have acknowleged Unisimu. The response to this is, “Why shouldn't we acknowledge [him] when [he] is also our companion?”
That which took them so long to return was because they did not have any fare with which to return home.
Kapok is burned on my arm.
You know the message God sent to the people of Israel, announcing the good news of peace through Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all.
A person who is a slave, he is a servant who is made to suffer by his leader [who gives him] lots of work.
All this took about 450 years. “After this, God gave them judges until the time of Samuel the prophet.
For the unbelieving husband has been sanctified through his wife, and the unbelieving wife has been sanctified through her believing husband. Otherwise your children would be unclean, but as it is, they are holy.
Small, carved wooden spoon.
idolatry and witchcraft; hatred, discord, jealousy, fits of rage, selfish ambition, dissensions, factions
Add onto
The reason Utù is whispering to to his friend is so that his mother and father will not know that he will accompany his friend to go to Manila.
if it is to encourage, then give encouragement; if it is giving, then give generously; if it is to lead, do it diligently; if it is to show mercy, do it cheerfully.
I do not write to you because you do not know the truth, but because you do know it and because no lie comes from the truth.
Moth ball
Motivate
he is conceited and understands nothing. He has an unhealthy interest in controversies and quarrels about words that result in envy, strife, malicious talk, evil suspicions
edible red larvae of a beetle found in rattan
Certainly not! If that were so, how could God judge the world?
When the proconsul saw what had happened, he believed, for he was amazed at the teaching about the Lord.
And be careful su possibly you will fall asleep and suddenly your younger sibling will fall.
And do not set your heart on what you will eat or drink; do not worry about it.
Let us fix our eyes on Jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith, who for the joy set before him endured the cross, scorning its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
Slant-eyed; lovely.
There is someone who gets annoyed by the children if they are playing
Within hearing distance
a faith and knowledge resting on the hope of eternal life, which God, who does not lie, promised before the beginning of time,
I will set out and go back to my father and say to him: Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you.
so that even handkerchiefs and aprons that had touched him were taken to the sick, and their illnesses were cured and the evil spirits left them.
"You must be on your guard. You will be handed over to the local councils and flogged in the synagogues. On account of me you will stand before governors and kings as witnesses to them.
If, in fact, Abraham was justified by works, he had something to boast about—but not before God.
The person who felt badly because his child newly died, the next day he felt better and his thoughts cleared.
flock to
Each tree is recognized by its own fruit. People do not pick figs from thornbushes, or grapes from briers.
long bamboo, whether growing or as water poles
“Remember what I told you: ‘A servant is not greater than his master.’ If they persecuted me, they will persecute you also. If they obeyed my teaching, they will obey yours also.”
Then he said, “Here I am, I have come to do your will.” He sets aside the first to establish the second.
become smaller, as a sore that is healing
give something
At this the Jews began to grumble about him because he said, "I am the bread that came down from heaven."
kind of bird; horned lark.
I tell you the truth, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
All men will hate you because of me, but he who stands firm to the end will be saved.
When he had gone a little farther, he saw James son of Zebedee and his brother John in a boat, preparing their nets.
As soon as the grain is ripe, he puts the sickle to it, because the harvest has come."
unanimous
I robbed other churches by receiving support from them so as to serve you.
permit something to fully develop or mature
The water has come to a boil already.
Some of the Jews were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, as did a large number of God-fearing Greeks and quite a few prominent women.
"Do not stop him," Jesus said. "No one who does a miracle in my name can in the next moment say anything bad about me,
When we are judged by the Lord, we are being disciplined so that we will not be condemned with the world.
Water
If he didn't catch it, he didn't [successfully] go after and catch it.
But Jesus knew what they were thinking and said to the man with the shriveled hand, “Get up and stand in front of everyone.” So he got up and stood there.
To taste
For the husband is the head of the wife as Christ is the head of the church, his body, of which he is the Savior.
When Zechariah saw him, he was startled and was gripped with fear.
The soldiers also came up and mocked him. They offered him wine vinegar
From then on Judas watched for an opportunity to hand him over.
As for a person who is stepping down to the ground from his house, if he hears the call of a dove at the same time, he/she will not go ahead with climbing down.
To stress or emphasize something spoken.
If one moves very close, they are very near each other.
How can you say to your brother, ‘Let me take the speck out of your eye,’ when all the time there is a plank in your own eye?
ride two on a horse.
chew
shield
The older people go out to a field of matured secondary growth and have a ceremony to determine whether it would be good to cut the growth on that piece of ground for a field.
Hawk or hawk-eagle resembling a sparrow hawk
Name of a linow deep pool, two streams, and a village
A dog who is hunting a pig smells the footprints of the pig and then follows the scent.
The bones which are left over are fed to the dogs.
The centurion, seeing what had happened, praised God and said, "Surely this was a righteous man."
And he took the children in his arms, put his hands on them and blessed them.
arrow
He went there to register with Mary, who was pledged to be married to him and was expecting a child.
Child.
He doesn't wait to be told [to do something].
Just as he was speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, appeared. With him was a crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests, the teachers of the law, and the elders.
Name of a disease of fish
I am sending him to you for the express purpose that you may know about our circumstances and that he may encourage your hearts.
Because he himself suffered when he was tempted, he is able to help those who are being tempted
To be brought back to life
If she will no longer give-birth, she will stop bearing.
I am here beside you; I am here.
The roasted corn is fed to the mother who has newly given birth so that the blood clots will be broken loose and be discharged which were inside her body.
"If I said something wrong," Jesus replied, "testify as to what is wrong. But if I spoke the truth, why did you strike me?"
beloved
Those people are zealous to win you over, but for no good. What they want is to alienate you from us, so that you may have zeal for them.
With that, one of Jesus’ companions reached for his sword, drew it out and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
scraps of material, paper, or mat material
When crabs are wrapped in a leaf, we tie them up securely by wrapping a vine around them several times.
scratchy weeds among rice
Arm wrestling in a test of strength.
Pray that I may proclaim it clearly, as I should.
Don't grumble against each other, brothers, or you will be judged. The Judge is standing at the door!
And do not think you can say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ I tell you that out of these stones God can raise up children for Abraham.
Later they sent some of the Pharisees and Herodians to Jesus to catch him in his words.
bet.
I'm after the house that Jeremy made but I don't yet have anything with which to pay.
to be surprised, amazed, horrified
And one of them struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his right ear.
raise
Sabina and Pitikanon ran away together.
smoke out bees
large cheeks.
The next day the rulers, the elders and the teachers of the law met in Jerusalem.
fat of an animal or human.
know
Even though you have ten thousand guardians in Christ, you do not have many fathers, for in Christ Jesus I became your father through the gospel.
‘But you, Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah; for out of you will come a ruler who will shepherd my people Israel.’”
A palm tree which has an inedible, poisonous heart.
“Surely not, Lord!” Peter replied. “I have never eaten anything impure or unclean.”
He chews trash.
When there is a shallow mini-lake of water which doesn’t dry up, that is a swamp because it has never ever (lit. not yet ever) been cut.
A chicken who is ill, its comb darkens.
During those days another large crowd gathered. Since they had nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples to him and said,
feathery hair of bamboo
I know that his command leads to eternal life. So whatever I say is just what the Father has told me to say."
He said to him, ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, they will not be convinced even if someone rises from the dead.’”
important due to status or education
The woman didn't expect that those words of her male-companion would be fulfilled that he would return on that day.
Plunge your spears into the pig, too.
black and red Ata blouse
dance
Term of address used by a husband to his wife
To make a canal/drain to divert water
I answered, "Sir, you know."
If then I do not grasp the meaning of what someone is saying, I am a foreigner to the speaker, and he is a foreigner to me.
Our house was protected from the wate
In their fright the women bowed down with their faces to the ground, but the men said to them, "Why do you look for the living among the dead?
He replied, “Because you have so little faith. Truly I tell you, if you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move. Nothing will be impossible for you.”
He began to call down curses on himself, and he swore to them, "I don't know this man you're talking about."
Uncle's pain penetrates from his chest to his back
spread out one’s wings or arms.
I will buy back my dog because I was forced to sell it because there was nothing else I could do.
To him be the power for ever and ever. Amen.
By faith Abraham, even though he was past age--and Sarah herself was barren- -was enabled to become a father because he considered him faithful who had made the promise.
straighten, as one's back
hoof
So after they had fasted and prayed, they placed their hands on them and sent them off.
It resembles it’s mother; it has a red jaw.
Immediately Jesus reached out his hand and caught him. “You of little faith,” he said, “why did you doubt?”
Again he said, "What shall we say the kingdom of God is like, or what parable shall we use to describe it?
The rope is that which is setting a limit so that it will not go any farther.
And every woman who prays or prophesies with her head uncovered dishonors her head--it is just as though her head were shaved.
he did it to demonstrate his righteousness at the present time, so as to be just and the one who justifies those who have faith in Jesus.
severe infection under the skin in fingers or toes
The tempter came to him and said, “If you are the Son of God, tell these stones to become bread.”
But he replied, “The man who made me well said to me, ‘Pick up your mat and walk.’”
a cleared area around a field
He asked them, "What are you discussing together as you walk along?"
Low platform around inside of house where people sit or sleep
He called out, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
suck
Then I heard the number of those who were sealed: 144,000 from all the tribes of Israel.
Let your conversation be always full of grace, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how to answer everyone.
When they arrived, he said to them: “You know how I lived the whole time I was with you, from the first day I came into the province of Asia.
If there is a landslide (lit. ground which landslides), the trees become uprooted and fall.
Likewise
power
But I have not used any of these rights. And I am not writing this in the hope that you will do such things for me, for I would rather die than allow anyone to deprive me of this boast.
remove water from a pool to catch fish
Name of a river and/or the village on this river which is just south of Maambago.
We’ll use Buanbuan for the payment.
"Then another servant came and said, 'Sir, here is your mina; I have kept it laid away in a piece of cloth.
prey on
palm wood from palm trees
The fifth angel sounded his trumpet, and I saw a star that had fallen from the sky to the earth. The star was given the key to the shaft of the Abyss.
Taganay is the one who took care of Lita's children who were left behind.
“If you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? Even sinners love those who love them.
small non-poisonous snake
There they crucified him, and with him two others—one on each side and Jesus in the middle.
So whatever you believe about these things keep between yourself and God. Blessed is the man who does not condemn himself by what he approves.
The stem of a coconut tree has a hard center vein which can be made into a broom.
“I am telling you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe that I am who I am.”
term of address to a little girl.
We’ll get the girl to agree who doesn’t want to.
to go over horizon as the moon
Tie together
When we ride a jeep from Valencia, when we get to Baguntaas , it is halfway to Nasuli. That is the halfway point of the ride.
Hurry up.
The only thing left [to do} is to fell [the many trees ] in their field.
I don't know.
for a while
When you were slaves to sin, you were free from the control of righteousness.
The mother pinched and pulled the cheek of her child because he was always playing and wouldn't come home.
Cook the pork by boiling
Then the righteous will answer him, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink?
There were those who followed me who were also fishing by illuninating the water with a light but they were using a Petromax lantern for illumination.
David says the same thing when he speaks of the blessedness of the one to whom God credits righteousness apart from works:
miss, be lonesome for
oversee.
Brideprice
Roll of fat around the waist of a baby or woman.
reduce, as a price
The child said, “Uncle, my father is staying in the house
Jesus called out with a loud voice, "Father, into your hands I commit my spirit." When he had said this, he breathed his last
middle-sized red rat with a white tail
scratch head with the ball of the fingers
she won’t use the medicine because it may hurt her.
In the very same way, these dreamers pollute their own bodies, reject authority and slander celestial beings.
Therefore, my brothers, be all the more eager to make your calling and election sure. For if you do these things, you will never fall,
cross one’s thighs.
If there are six crosswise slices, that is enough for one each as we are six people.
A nod or flick (insect’s head)
We were taken by surprise because we had not been asked
The child who is wiggley can’t sit still
It was revealed to them that they were not serving themselves but you, when they spoke of the things that have now been told you by those who have preached the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven. Even angels long to look into these things.
In the synagogue there was a man possessed by a demon, an impure spirit. He cried out at the top of his voice,
we (1st person plural, exclusive)
This is also why you pay taxes, for the authorities are God’s servants, who give their full time to governing.
The meaning of the sun being mid-way (lit. ear position), is that the sun is as high as one’s ear as it shines.
Slaves, obey your earthly masters in everything; and do it, not only when their eye is on you and to win their favor, but with sincerity of heart and reverence for the Lord.
He also says, “In the beginning, Lord, you laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of your hands.
be greedy
I will beg some of your palm tree fiber because I will make it into kindling so that we will have a fire.
put medicine leaf on a swelling or pain
And he directed the people to sit down on the grass. Taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke the loaves. Then he gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the people.
I declare to you, brothers, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor does the perishable inherit the imperishable.
Make it your ambition to lead a quiet life, to mind your own business and to work with your hands, just as we told you,
What good will it be for someone to gain the whole world, yet forfeit their soul? Or what can anyone give in exchange for their soul?
A stuttering person is slow to express [his words] because his words repeatedly snag.
grow an extra finger or toe
married couple
Short and squat.
To suffer a negative result of being interrupted
As for the person who is going to buy rice in Patil when there is no rice because the stores sold out, he just returns empty handed having gone to buy when there wasn't any rice.
pick out, as an ant from food
so that even though
But I do not think I am in the least inferior to those "super-apostles."
feed
To keep looking down carefully; watch
Remember your leaders, who spoke the word of God to you. Consider the outcome of their way of life and imitate their faith.
Slower
corner area of a house or room; to put away in a corner for safekeeping
When the harvest time approached, he sent his servants to the tenants to collect his fruit.
fetch water
Upper leg joint
After the man and woman have fed each other, they have become a couple, they have married each other.
subside
intentionally break off
When we are in a good relationship with our companions, if there is a small problem, it will be quickly resolved.
It is written: " 'As surely as I live,' says the Lord, 'every knee will bow before me; every tongue will confess to God.' "
to behave
But he refused. Instead, he went off and had the man thrown into prison until he could pay the debt.
opposed to
Indeed he was ill, and almost died. But God had mercy on him, and not on him only but also on me, to spare me sorrow upon sorrow.
When someone holes-up, we stay there in the mountains. We take refuge when there are raiders.
that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked.
You learned it from Epaphras, our dear fellow servant, who is a faithful minister of Christ on our behalf,
I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."
If a person who is jealous cannot steal, he will hate us and his view of us will be bad.
Whatever medicine is effective [against] an illness, that is strong medicine
There was a person whose toes we touching and connected. to each other.
Then he turned toward the woman and said to Simon, “Do you see this woman? I came into your house. You did not give me any water for my feet, but she wet my feet with her tears and wiped them with her hair.
grunt, as a frightened pig
Greet Apelles, whose fidelity to Christ has stood the test. Greet those who belong to the household of Aristobulus.
Dog
A man with leprosy came and knelt before him and said, “Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean.”
To crack or break incompletely.
Moses was educated in all the wisdom of the Egyptians and was powerful in speech and action.
If we live in a village, at each house there is a divider which is a fence which is the boundary.
And so upon you will come all the righteous blood that has been shed on earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah son of Berekiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar.
She wasn’t rebuked.
A fungal skin disease (double-skin)
He replied, “When evening comes, you say, ‘It will be fair weather, for the sky is red,’
sky, heaven
For you were like sheep going astray, but now you have returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls.
"And when I broke the seven loaves for the four thousand, how many basketfuls of pieces did you pick up?" They answered, "Seven."
And on the highway, there is that which has been placed in the center which also glows.
Jesus answered him, “Simon, I have something to tell you.” “Tell me, teacher,” he said.
surround
I fear for you, that somehow I have wasted my efforts on you.
We are hard pressed on every side, but not crushed; perplexed, but not in despair;
The custom about harvesting corn is, the ones who will harvest corn are the one(s) who planted.
tire, tire tracks
To slice.
This took place to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet:
Give me some of that betelnut you’re chewing.
Carry on back.
Even as he spoke, many put their faith in him.
dangerous
I am blocking that which he is relentlessly pursuing.
Now Mary stood outside the tomb crying. As she wept, she bent over to look into the tomb
But since it involves questions about words and names and your own law—settle the matter yourselves. I will not be a judge of such things.”
to make a noise or a racket
They cause [the house/village] to be taken by surprise when they have banded together in mass to attack so that they all can, without exception, kill [everyone].
That same day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the lake.
I swung the rope around three times and then it made a loud snapping sound.
To have or cause someone else to do something
Topic of conversation
Now he had to go through Samaria.
woven abaca trousers or blanket
Annas the high priest was there, and so were Caiaphas, John, Alexander and others of the high priest’s family.
Simon has described to us how God first intervened to choose a people for his name from the Gentiles.
Never mind, go ahead.
They spit on him, and took the staff and struck him on the head again and again.
Who is wise and understanding among you? Let him show it by his good life, by deeds done in the humility that comes from wisdom.
After he had said this, he went on to tell them, “Our friend Lazarus has fallen asleep; but I am going there to wake him up.”
They kept asking, “What does he mean by ‘a little while’? We don’t understand what he is saying.”
But not a hair of your head will perish.
Brothers, if someone is caught in a sin, you who are spiritual should restore him gently. But watch yourself, or you also may be tempted.
Only one member of a pair of objects
We drag the rattan when we return to the house.
If there is someone who collects payment for a horse but it has been sold on credit, the one who has received the horse can use anything for payment.
Regarding a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space [made from the lift].
For it is we who are the circumcision, we who serve God by his Spirit, who boast in Christ Jesus, and who put no confidence in the flesh—
When Peter saw him, he asked, "Lord, what about him?"
Festus answered, “Paul is being held at Caesarea, and I myself am going there soon.
A small biting fish
leader
to play a tune
To split open, as of dry soil.
in a flash, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, the dead will be raised imperishable, and we will be changed.
All this is from God, who reconciled us to himself through Christ and gave us the ministry of reconciliation:
Then I will tell them plainly, ‘I never knew you. Away from me, you evildoers!’
When we are holding a child in our arms and he lets his back bend back, the child is leaning back and over [against one's arms].
chew, gnaw (as a rat)
a sign
To wrap something up in cloth.
reserve
stop by and pick up
dust
Then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid. Go and tell my brothers to go to Galilee; there they will see me.”
Then he ordered his disciples not to tell anyone that he was the Messiah.
Her teeth are close together.
Swelling of jaw or jaws below the ear, especially of mumps.
Denim is sturdy.
These two were picked up enroute. They were brought along.
to open their eyes and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a place among those who are sanctified by faith in me.'
No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
Test the depth
After that, he appeared to more than five hundred of the brothers and sisters at the same time, most of whom are still living, though some have fallen asleep.
"Do not handle! Do not taste! Do not touch!"?
For I received from the Lord what I also passed on to you: The Lord Jesus, on the night he was betrayed, took bread,
The only one who will be designated to claim the head will be the one who carried the pig on his back.
And the dragon stood on the shore of the sea.
But they did not understand what he meant and were afraid to ask him about it.
He took her by the hand and helped her to her feet. Then he called the believers and the widows and presented her to them alive.
It is better, if it is God's will, to suffer for doing good than for doing evil.
To permit
Give the people these instructions, so that no one may be open to blame.
nipa palm before it is cut
“While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.”
when we are slandered, we answer kindly. Up to this moment we have become the scum of the earth, the refuse of the world.
To flow forcefully (water under pressure, swift water)
The albino  antabun heron has no mixture of design because it is completely white.
The woman said, “Because you did what you said, I discern that you are not a liar.”
As he says in Hosea: “I will call them ‘my people’ who are not my people; and I will call her ‘my loved one’ who is not my loved one,”
What anyone else dares to boast about--I am speaking as a fool--I also dare to boast about. Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they Abraham's descendants? So am I.
so that we can preach the gospel in the regions beyond you. For we do not want to boast about work already done in someone else’s territory.
messy hair
Groove in skin
to flame up and become hot (as fire)
Cut rattan
Peter sent them all out of the room; then he got down on his knees and prayed. Turning toward the dead woman, he said, “Tabitha, get up.” She opened her eyes, and seeing Peter she sat up.
But he said, “I must proclaim the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns also, because that is why I was sent.”
No longer will there be any curse. The throne of God and of the Lamb will be in the city, and his servants will serve him.
A kind of fish.
These men are blemishes at your love feasts, eating with you without the slightest qualm--shepherds who feed only themselves. They are clouds without rain, blown along by the wind; autumn trees, without fruit and uprooted--twice dead.
The nations will walk by its light, and the kings of the earth will bring their splendor into it.
Now there were seven brothers among us. The first one married and died, and since he had no children, he left his wife to his brother.
"Now learn this lesson from the fig tree: As soon as its twigs get tender and its leaves come out, you know that summer is near
fetch
To keep me from becoming conceited because of these surpassingly great revelations, there was given me a thorn in my flesh, a messenger of Satan, to torment me.
The floor sagged when something heavy was placed on it but it didn't break.
Metal sheath
Yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his splendor was dressed like one of these.
It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he would not die before he had seen the Lord’s Messiah.
A kind of thorny weed.
guavano
While he was in Bethany, reclining at the table in the home of a man known as Simon the Leper, a woman came with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume, made of pure nard. She broke the jar and poured the perfume on his head.
“Very truly I tell you, whoever hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life and will not be judged but has crossed over from death to life.
Every day they continued to meet together in the temple courts. They broke bread in their homes and ate together with glad and sincere hearts,
Scaffolding is the temporary structure on which we stand when we build the body of a house.
“If you are the Son of God,” he said, “throw yourself down. For it is written: ‘He will command his angels concerning you, and they will lift you up in their hands, so that you will not strike your foot against a stone.’”
By all this we are encouraged.
but to sit at my right or left is not for me to grant. These places belong to those for whom they have been prepared."
On hearing his words, some of the people said, "Surely this man is the Prophet."
Cheaper.
to finish the rim of a basket
As for a side stream of a river, there is an outlet downstream.
“Nazareth! Can anything good come from there?” Nathanael asked. “Come and see,” said Philip.
Even the leaves, they also drop off when they shed.
To form a cocoon (moths, butterflies, larva)
think about
Elijah was a man just like us. He prayed earnestly that it would not rain, and it did not rain on the land for three and a half years.
As Jesus went on from there, two blind men followed him, calling out, “Have mercy on us, Son of David!”
Repetitive action; again
To abandon
If others have this right of support from you, shouldn’t we have it all the more? But we did not use this right. On the contrary, we put up with anything rather than hinder the gospel of Christ.
But not everyone possesses this knowledge. Some people are still so accustomed to idols that when they eat sacrificial food they think of it as having been sacrificed to a god, and since their conscience is weak, it is defiled.
kind of grass in a pasture
There is, there are
I know you are Abraham's descendants. Yet you are ready to kill me, because you have no room for my word.
something used to fasten by pressing against an object, as bamboo strips for walling
He is always tossing and turning because his pain is excessive.
Even if I caused you sorrow by my letter, I do not regret it. Though I did regret it—I see that my letter hurt you, but only for a little while—
You gave to Sob-ul, doubting if she would pay for it; instead she really has.
Hard, as wood.
cut off
But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace to me was not without effect. No, I worked harder than all of them--yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me.
“Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, the Way of the Sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles—
Still another angel, who had charge of the fire, came from the altar and called in a loud voice to him who had the sharp sickle, "Take your sharp sickle and gather the clusters of grapes from the earth's vine, because its grapes are ripe."
Opposition arose, however, from members of the Synagogue of the Freedmen (as it was called)—Jews of Cyrene and Alexandria as well as the provinces of Cilicia and Asia—who began to argue with Stephen.
And how can anyone preach unless they are sent? As it is written: “How beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news!”
Thus there were fourteen generations in all from Abraham to David, fourteen from David to the exile to Babylon, and fourteen from the exile to the Messiah.
Land tax of 25 centavos or a can of tipaka.
Jesus sent him away at once with a strong warning: "See that you don't tell this to anyone. But go, show yourself to the priest and offer the sacrifices that Moses commanded for your cleansing, as a testimony to them."
Slightly unripe
Next month, I will borrow your land.
Jesus said to them, "The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them; and those who exercise authority over them call themselves Benefactors.
Put it between those
The sun will be turned to darkness and the moon to blood before the coming of the great and glorious day of the Lord.
for he will be great in the sight of the Lord. He is never to take wine or other fermented drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit even before he is born.
To carry in both arms, as a child.
It is like Ann Joy who was seriously ill. We lost hope because she would not live.
Eighty
That is why I did not even consider myself worthy to come to you. But say the word, and my servant will be healed.
The smoke of the incense, together with the prayers of God’s people, went up before God from the angel’s hand.
So Simon Peter climbed back into the boat and dragged the net ashore. It was full of large fish, 153, but even with so many the net was not torn.
fiancee
abstain from work or music due to mourning
to clear an area around a field in order to keep wild pigs out
The design of your blouse is pretty.
For just as we share abundantly in the sufferings of Christ, so also our comfort abounds through Christ.
drown; be overwhelmed (as by problems)
To bring someone along with oneself
take care of someone
And he will go on before the Lord, in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of the parents to their children and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous—to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.”
They are banding together to attack a certain house.
Consider the ravens: They do not sow or reap, they have no storeroom or barn; yet God feeds them. And how much more valuable you are than birds!
damming of creek to trap fish
If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.
For what is our hope, our joy, or the crown in which we will glory in the presence of our Lord Jesus when he comes? Is it not you?
A sleeping mat.
"I tell you the truth," Jesus answered, "before Abraham was born, I am!"
to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has freely given us in the One he loves.
Won’t he rather say, ‘Prepare my supper, get yourself ready and wait on me while I eat and drink; after that you may eat and drink’?
And whoever welcomes one such child in my name welcomes me.
to be terminated, as a pregnancy resulting in a miscarriage
hard shell
Slicer
because it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins.
a mass of twisted vines
When they had carried out all that was written about him, they took him down from the cross and laid him in a tomb.
“Their feet are swift to shed blood;
A kind of reed
Word used to shoo dogs.
to set apart from others of the same kind
meeting of men only.
To rise, as when water in a river, or tide, increases
Then Jesus said to her, “Your sins are forgiven.”
Kind of bird with a twitter; a quick noisy red bird.
The hens of the chicken, they likewise cluck as they express agreement with the rooster who is crowing.
money
For out of the heart come evil thoughts—murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false testimony, slander.
If you are taken along to another work, you are drawn over to it.
Then a cloud appeared and enveloped them, and a voice came from the cloud: "This is my Son, whom I love. Listen to him!"
Therefore I do not run like a man running aimlessly; I do not fight like a man beating the air.
supernatural power
The teacher who returned to Maniki, they took her as far as Patil as they escorted her.
But you, keep your head in all situations, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelist, discharge all the duties of your ministry.
Uzziah the father of Jotham, Jotham the father of Ahaz, Ahaz the father of Hezekiah,
Going on from that place, he went into their synagogue,
To be strong-willed or disobedient.
Provide mounts for Paul so that he may be taken safely to Governor Felix."
Through him you believe in God, who raised him from the dead and glorified him, and so your faith and hope are in God.
The [word/custom of] watchfulness, we desire  to think about our neighbors/friends who don't have any means [of caring for themselves].
When Jesus had finished saying all this to the people who were listening, he entered Capernaum.
shake water from body
The people took the young man home alive and were greatly comforted.
Some time after this, Jesus crossed to the far shore of the Sea of Galilee (that is, the Sea of Tiberias),
I’ll roast the corn over a fire and even the crabs are good that way.
And they began to call out to him, "Hail, king of the Jews!"
and said, “You went into the house of uncircumcised men and ate with them.”
If what he has built survives, he will receive his reward.
For there are many rebellious people, mere talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision group.
Tooth; kernels of corn on a cob.
“It is when a person walks at night that they stumble, for they have no light.”
move to one side
To examine closely; to discern identity by seeing or hearing
Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were sitting there opposite the tomb.
And now, dear children, continue in him, so that when he appears we may be confident and unashamed before him at his coming.
Don't give in to them, because more than forty of them are waiting in ambush for him. They have taken an oath not to eat or drink until they have killed him. They are ready now, waiting for your consent to their request."
Kind of bird; killdeer, red-legged partridge, least sandpiper
They totally destroy themselves. The only thing they give attention to is their own bad conduct.
Command them to do good, to be rich in good deeds, and to be generous and willing to share.
for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,
Now then, you and the Sanhedrin petition the commander to bring him before you on the pretext of wanting more accurate information about his case. We are ready to kill him before he gets here."
As for a dog, it likes to make a bed on the fireplace while the fireplace is still warm.
weave walls of bamboo.
Pay.
Ruler
If we approach someone we are the ones to come close to him.
When the child crawls, it also moves forward.
dragged him out of the city and began to stone him. Meanwhile, the witnesses laid their coats at the feet of a young man named Saul.
A hoop.
Gums (of a person)
(The Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, and that there are neither angels nor spirits, but the Pharisees believe all these things.)
By faith in the name of Jesus, this man whom you see and know was made strong. It is Jesus’ name and the faith that comes through him that has completely healed him, as you can all see.
If a person asks when [a couple] was married, someone will respond, they were just married yesterday.
If you build a fire and blow on it, you will get smoke in your eyes and they will start smarting.
Moses was faithful as a servant in all God’s house, testifying to what would be said in the future.
Jesus replied, “Do what you came for, friend.” Then the men stepped forward, seized Jesus and arrested him.
marry one’s sibling (incest)
The night before Herod was to bring him to trial, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and sentries stood guard at the entrance.
Distance
They romp with their owners.
One day Jesus was teaching, and Pharisees and teachers of the law were sitting there. They had come from every village of Galilee and from Judea and Jerusalem. And the power of the Lord was present for him to heal the sick.
This righteousness is given through faith in Jesus Christ to all who believe. There is no difference between Jew and Gentile,
Beckon
Jesus answered them, “Have you never read what David did when he and his companions were hungry?
My feet did not touch the cement.
open
When we finish off the last bits of food from a pot, we scrape the crust of the rice from the pot.
Now as for me, I’m leaving.
Be joyful always;
Craving meat because of nursing a baby.
Here a dinner was given in Jesus’ honor. Martha served, while Lazarus was among those reclining at the table with him.
There is a house whose pattern is pretty.
hunger for fish or meat
So he who was seated on the cloud swung his sickle over the earth, and the earth was harvested.
by you
Dear friends, do not be surprised at the painful trial you are suffering, as though something strange were happening to you.
To cut and trim stalks and tips from any kind of bamboo
to be removed from something
“What do you want with us, Son of God?” they shouted. “Have you come here to torture us before the appointed time?”
We search for the offspring.
You were taught, with regard to your former way of life, to put off your old self, which is being corrupted by its deceitful desires;
The cat pounced on a green lizard upon which it was preying as it likewise was preying on a cochroach.
The soldiers mistook us for someone else because they mistakenly supposed that we were the ones they were searching for who had escaped from the prison.
"From childhood," he answered. "It has often thrown him into fire or water to kill him. But if you can do anything, take pity on us and help us."
smelly.
The seventh angel sounded his trumpet, and there were loud voices in heaven, which said: “The kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our Lord and of his Messiah, and he will reign for ever and ever.”
Keep stoking the fire because we’re hungry.
In fact, when we were with you, we kept telling you that we would be persecuted. And it turned out that way, as you well know.
important
Why, you do not even know what will happen tomorrow. What is your life? You are a mist that appears for a little while and then vanishes.
All
Whoever has will be given more; whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him."
The Lord answered him, "You hypocrites! Doesn't each of you on the Sabbath untie his ox or donkey from the stall and lead it out to give it water?
But I tell you, Elijah has come, and they have done to him everything they wished, just as it is written about him."
His intent was that now, through the church, the manifold wisdom of God should be made known to the rulers and authorities in the heavenly realms,
The ear of corn in which the grains have not filled in, is corn which has not reached completion.
Put it away now
eel
Meanwhile, all the people were wailing and mourning for her. “Stop wailing,” Jesus said. “She is not dead but asleep.”
He regarded disgrace for the sake of Christ as of greater value than the treasures of Egypt, because he was looking ahead to his reward.
This is an illustration for the present time, indicating that the gifts and sacrifices being offered were not able to clear the conscience of the worshiper.
As a result, many of them believed, as did also a number of prominent Greek women and many Greek men.
To have a fiery temper; to be fierce or brave.
It is lifted by leverage so that it will roll.
You come on Monday.
When we plant yearly fields, we go to see how the corn fields.
Termite
accomplish, finish
something to do with having a spirit
Custom, manners.
because the law brings wrath. And where there is no law there is no transgression.
To be disappointed.
until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet." '
Why not? Because they pursued it not by faith but as if it were by works. They stumbled over the stumbling stone.
Like newborn babies, crave pure spiritual milk, so that by it you may grow up in your salvation,
Hair bangs.
When bees swarm, they just stay in their hive for a week and then leave the hive as they transfer.
To easily become frustrated
His acquaintance subtracted three hundred pesos. The money which arrived,  was only two hundred [pesos].
The niece who had been recently married was broken loose from her marriage relationship by her aunt because she had simply advised her to desert her husband.
weave in and out, as jeeps in traffic
Smoke
to make alive
Those who went ahead and those who followed shouted, "Hosanna! " "Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!"
For I am with you, and no one is going to attack and harm you, because I have many people in this city.”
For this reason, and because of the angels, the woman ought to have a sign of authority on her head.
For he knew it was out of self-interest that they had handed Jesus over to him.
If there is someone from Maguimon who is leaving from Patil but he has left to return home, and there are others who have followed later who are returning to Maambago, they will say, “Usì, you will be inadvertently passed up.” The person from Maguimon will answer, “Nevermind. You just go on ahead.”
punishment
If there is a person who actually was the one who did wrong, and then he accused someone else because he was causing his theft to be attributed [to someone else].
If they had been thinking of the country they had left, they would have had opportunity to return.
The brothers at Lystra and Iconium spoke well of him.
Watch, care for.
To intentionally swallow
do something alone
narrow passage between two cliffs
The reason why that tree is called dayuan is because the birds flock to it to pluck the baliti fruit.
If he comes suddenly, do not let him find you sleeping.
A skirt of  thin material, is show-through when we look at it.
Lazy.
Nest
ritual performed to remove a charm
rim or reinforcement of a basket
After Festus had conferred with his council, he declared: "You have appealed to Caesar. To Caesar you will go!"
Jesus stopped and ordered the man to be brought to him. When he came near, Jesus asked him,
I have been constantly on the move. I have been in danger from rivers, in danger from bandits, in danger from my own countrymen, in danger from Gentiles; in danger in the city, in danger in the country, in danger at sea; and in danger from false brothers.
blood
A kind of rattan.
to wind, as a vine
To have to hunker down (fearing capture)
"But what about you?" he asked. "Who do you say I am?" Peter answered, "You are the Christ. "
anxious
Were you a slave when you were called? Don’t let it trouble you—although if you can gain your freedom, do so.
The great city split into three parts, and the cities of the nations collapsed. God remembered Babylon the Great and gave her the cup filled with the wine of the fury of his wrath.
I appeal to you for my son Onesimus, who became my son while I was in chains.
cheer in praise, as at a game or cockfight
The spirits of prophets are subject to the control of prophets.
The Queen of the South will rise at the judgment with this generation and condemn it; for she came from the ends of the earth to listen to Solomon’s wisdom, and now something greater than Solomon is here.
Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus to avoid spending time in the province of Asia, for he was in a hurry to reach Jerusalem, if possible, by the day of Pentecost.
A kind of cicada.
be intensely thirsty
beat or whip repeatedly
Some wanted to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him.
When Jesus saw her weeping, and the Jews who had come along with her also weeping, he was deeply moved in spirit and troubled.
Rather, as it is written: "Those who were not told about him will see, and those who have not heard will understand."
If the tooth is chiseled off, it will be easier to pull out
a kind of hard bamboo used for flooring which has short joints and two lines at each joint with thorns
part of
If it is round but has become smaller, it has shrunk.
rectangular woven container used for carrying lunch or items
If the spear projects , there’s a raider around.
accustomed.
To cut in half
newly
orderly
As for a dog, when it chews on a bone, it makes a crunching sound.
At once I was in the Spirit, and there before me was a throne in heaven with someone sitting on it.
Jesus went up on a mountainside and called to him those he wanted, and they came to him.
Very early in the morning, while it was still dark, Jesus got up, left the house and went off to a solitary place, where he prayed.
winnowing tray
House of worship
feel sorry for
see salilung (shade, shelter)
For if men do these things when the tree is green, what will happen when it is dry?"
Like she is single, so I’m single
a creek with icy cold water.
So he ran ahead and climbed a sycamore-fig tree to see him, since Jesus was coming that way.
get soaked
If anyone teaches otherwise and does not agree to the sound instruction of our Lord Jesus Christ and to godly teaching,
Isaiah said this because he saw Jesus' glory and spoke about him.
Make a tree good and its fruit will be good, or make a tree bad and its fruit will be bad, for a tree is recognized by its fruit.
Then the disciples understood that he was talking to them about John the Baptist.
He came to that which was his own, but his own did not receive him.
Anyone who claims to be in the light but hates his brother is still in the darkness.
When they had crucified him, they divided up his clothes by casting lots.
overtake and go ahead of
And he gave orders to stop the chariot. Then both Philip and the eunuch went down into the water, and Philip baptized him.
Then we will no longer be infants, tossed back and forth by the waves, and blown here and there by every wind of teaching and by the cunning and craftiness of people in their deceitful scheming.
To regard something or someone in some way
peel off layers from something, as onions or banana stalk
I tell you, you will not get out until you have paid the last penny. "
To some who were confident of their own righteousness and looked down on everyone else, Jesus told this parable:
youthful appearance
Jesus answered, "It is the one to whom I will give this piece of bread when I have dipped it in the dish." Then, dipping the piece of bread, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, son of Simon.
being fully persuaded that God had power to do what he had promised.
When he was alone, the Twelve and the others around him asked him about the parables.
Others, like seed sown on rocky places, hear the word and at once receive it with joy
Some men brought to him a paralyzed man, lying on a mat. When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the man, “Take heart, son; your sins are forgiven.”
river
"When he came to his senses, he said, 'How many of my father's hired men have food to spare, and here I am starving to death!
envy
Jesus said, "Have the people sit down." There was plenty of grass in that place, and they sat down (about five thousand men were there).
The manipulation of childbirth is like pushing but just gently.
To taste
He denied it again, with an oath: “I don’t know the man!”
So Herodias nursed a grudge against John and wanted to kill him. But she was not able to,
After Paul had seen the vision, we got ready at once to leave for Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to preach the gospel to them.
Yes, Father, for this is what you were pleased to do.
Jesus replied: "A certain man was preparing a great banquet and invited many guests.
Cutting loose the anchors, they left them in the sea and at the same time untied the ropes that held the rudders. Then they hoisted the foresail to the wind and made for the beach.
Make lime
citrus fruit
The beast was given a mouth to utter proud words and blasphemies and to exercise its authority for forty-two months.
Jesus said to her, "I am the resurrection and the life. He who believes in me will live, even though he dies;
Dear friends, I am not writing you a new command but an old one, which you have had since the beginning. This old command is the message you have heard.
sluggish, weak
a year ago
without being frightened in any way by those who oppose you. This is a sign to them that they will be destroyed, but that you will be saved--and that by God.
here
Slaves, obey your earthly masters with respect and fear, and with sincerity of heart, just as you would obey Christ.
To break the neck
Mucus from the nose; having a runny nose
After he said this, he was taken up before their very eyes, and a cloud hid him from their sight.
Whether women or men, the relationship of the spouses of their siblings is called patala-iras "spouses-in-law."
red mites
that each of you should learn to control your own body in a way that is holy and honorable,
Scarcely had [someone] spoke
At Iconium Paul and Barnabas went as usual into the Jewish synagogue. There they spoke so effectively that a great number of Jews and Greeks believed.
soft
If we claim to have fellowship with him and yet walk in the darkness, we lie and do not live out the truth.
stocks
I already gave you a warning when I was with you the second time. I now repeat it while absent: On my return I will not spare those who sinned earlier or any of the others,
This is big
The water came into the boat.
Peter motioned with his hand for them to be quiet and described how the Lord had brought him out of prison. “Tell James and the other brothers and sisters about this,” he said, and then he left for another place.
All by itself the soil produces grain-- first the stalk, then the head, then the full kernel in the head.
And so do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas and Luke, my fellow workers.
physical contact
I have eaten agkud but I don't know the process of making it.
Do everything you can to help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way and see that they have everything they need.
Selfish
Why question me? Ask those who heard me. Surely they know what I said."
The tree broke and fell over because it was rotten.
beautician
how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit and power, and how he went around doing good and healing all who were under the power of the devil, because God was with him.
Mosquito net
bright yellow bird
The lake that is dammed up, has no outlet
Instead we should write to them, telling them to abstain from food polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from the meat of strangled animals and from blood.
Then Felix, who was well acquainted with the Way, adjourned the proceedings. "When Lysias the commander comes," he said, "I will decide your case."
Is this blessedness only for the circumcised, or also for the uncircumcised? We have been saying that Abraham’s faith was credited to him as righteousness.
The Jews who heard these words were again divided.
They came to appease them and escorted them from the prison, requesting them to leave the city.
Donghuan was scared to death because he was thinking, “I will probably be eaten by this big python.”
The man went away and told the Jewish leaders that it was Jesus who had made him well.
His/her emotions are easily upset.
When he had received the drink, Jesus said, "It is finished." With that, he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.
kobbiung tune.
So the word of God spread. The number of disciples in Jerusalem increased rapidly, and a large number of priests became obedient to the faith.
That man should not think he will receive anything from the Lord; he is a double-minded man, unstable in all he does.
borrow someone's land
The woman who is having difficulty as she gives birth, her stomach will be opened up so the child can be caused to be taken out.
To make polite request.
“Say to Daughter Zion, ‘See, your king comes to you, gentle and riding on a donkey, and on a colt, the foal of a donkey.’”
"Behold, I am coming soon! My reward is with me, and I will give to everyone according to what he has done.
“On that day you will realize that I am in my Father, and you are in me, and I am in you.”
The flavor is different.
Cold
kind of blackened spear
lonesome
It is a fat head [of grain].
want sympathy
Homosexual activity whether all women or all men.
When I took my daughter down river, it wasn't until six o'clock in the morning when she was operated on.
In the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you.
As for people who swim underwater, [they] hold their breath as they swim underwater looking for fish.
be told
meet from
Men worshiped the dragon because he had given authority to the beast, and they also worshiped the beast and asked, "Who is like the beast? Who can make war against him?"
But as I told you, you have seen me and still you do not believe.
Delicious
travel downriver by raft
and last of all he appeared to me also, as to one abnormally born.
But Paul shook the snake off into the fire and suffered no ill effects.
To converse
The person who desires many women, that is a lustful person.
John, To the seven churches in the province of Asia: Grace and peace to you from him who is, and who was, and who is to come, and from the seven spirits before his throne, and from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth.
to puff up or regain shape (as a cushion)
He’s accustomed now
So he bent over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her. She got up at once and began to wait on them.
For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
When he landed at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the church and then went down to Antioch.
To slide and fall down at a distance.
wrap around, as a snake on a branch
brain.
Even though there are difficulties in our life situations, yet we just trust them to God.
Type of tulaang
This is a profound mystery--but I am talking about Christ and the church.
We will sleep outside on the ground on a certain mountain because there are many pigs I know about there.
How many days have I?
I write to you, dear children, because your sins have been forgiven on account of his name.
neck
reprimand
I’ll use your skirts temporarily.
whole kernels cut from a corncob
Then the disciples went back to where they were staying.
When the centurion and those with him who were guarding Jesus saw the earthquake and all that had happened, they were terrified, and exclaimed, “Surely he was the Son of God!”
For it is written in the Law of Moses: “Do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.” Is it about oxen that God is concerned?
catch, or collect anything into a recepticle.
hit the mark.
They will make war against the Lamb, but the Lamb will overcome them because he is Lord of lords and King of kings--and with him will be his called, chosen and faithful followers."
[When the it inches forward], the baby moves a little.
wrap tightly around something
come from
They all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
Outside are the dogs, those who practice magic arts, the sexually immoral, the murderers, the idolaters and everyone who loves and practices falsehood.
But the things that come out of a person’s mouth come from the heart, and these defile them.
I have not stopped giving thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers.
To move a little,
Every day.
cross-like symbol used to ward off spirits
The entire law is summed up in a single command: "Love your neighbor as yourself."
My backpack is lightweight.
who had come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. Those troubled by impure spirits were cured,
But Herod said, “I beheaded John. Who, then, is this I hear such things about?” And he tried to see him.
cucumber.
A kind of weed with a long tap root, thorny leaves, and vine-like branches.
cook
The rain came down, the streams rose, and the winds blew and beat against that house; yet it did not fall, because it had its foundation on the rock.
As for the buriak spear, the shaft has been decorated and has been wrapped with bronze to make the shaft beautiful (lit. good to see) up to the reinforced tip.
When the water has cooled off, we will drink it.
You-sing. smear some wet lime on the betelnut.
The women who had come with Jesus from Galilee followed Joseph and saw the tomb and how his body was laid in it.
They had such a sharp disagreement that they parted company. Barnabas took Mark and sailed for Cyprus,
dare or have courage to do something
If we love our neighbors (lit. companion), they will also love us.
Take care that what the prophets have said does not happen to you:
Wood poles used in framework of house
where she entered Zechariah’s home and greeted Elizabeth.
I tell you, no! But unless you repent, you too will all perish.
deliver a portion of fish or game to each house
Judas and Silas, who themselves were prophets, said much to encourage and strengthen the believers.
Jessica just wanted to claim a large cluster of lansones for herself.
[It will] possibly be one week. [It will] possibly be two weeks.
Crosswise slices
The fourth angel sounded his trumpet, and a third of the sun was struck, a third of the moon, and a third of the stars, so that a third of them turned dark. A third of the day was without light, and also a third of the night.
To this you were called, because Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in his steps.
The person who fell from a house, fell head over heels to the ground.
The child who always cries until daybreak is called a child who predicts bad luck.
Whoever finds their life will lose it, and whoever loses their life for my sake will find it.
Jesus replied, “I will also ask you one question. If you answer me, I will tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
If there is a child or adult who just gets up without awakening, that is [the meaning] of alimukawan to arouse from sleep without fully waking up.2To come to, from an unconscious state.
Once more he went away and prayed the same thing.
The leaders are having a group discussion about whether there will be [eventual] reciprocal exhanges for a brideprice.
next door
umbilical cord
hired hand for taking harvest downriver by raft
"What is truth?" Pilate asked. With this he went out again to the Jews and said, "I find no basis for a charge against him.
What then is my reward? Just this: that in preaching the gospel I may offer it free of charge, and so not make full use of my rights as a preacher of the gospel.
Rather, clothe yourselves with the Lord Jesus Christ, and do not think about how to gratify the desires of the sinful nature.
Labor pains
After saying goodbye to each other, we went aboard the ship, and they returned home.
The meaning is uncluttered, straight and our understanding [of the words] is clear.
For the Lamb at the center of the throne will be their shepherd; he will lead them to springs of living water. And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes."
There’s a lot of this rice.
lost
we’ll dig sweet potatoes to eat with the monkey later on.
Then Jesus asked him, "What is your name?"
is hanging down.
Now the Berean Jews were of more noble character than those in Thessalonica, for they received the message with great eagerness and examined the Scriptures every day to see if what Paul said was true.
Since you cannot do this very little thing, why do you worry about the rest?
For physical training is of some value, but godliness has value for all things, holding promise for both the present life and the life to come.
And beginning with Moses and all the Prophets, he explained to them what was said in all the Scriptures concerning himself.
As he went along, people spread their cloaks on the road.
If someone walks heavily and stomps their feet, those of us who are sleeping will be awakened.
So also, when we were underage, we were in slavery under the elemental spiritual forces of the world.
And there was a widow in that town who kept coming to him with the plea, ‘Grant me justice against my adversary.’
The next morning the Jews formed a conspiracy and bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink until they had killed Paul.
For if any Macedonians come with me and find you unprepared, we—not to say anything about you—would be ashamed of having been so confident.
The churches in the province of Asia send you greetings. Aquila and Priscilla greet you warmly in the Lord, and so does the church that meets at their house.
Our life is short.
plural particle; "and"; "approximately"
middle of the night
Therefore we are sending Judas and Silas to confirm by word of mouth what we are writing.
Cook the pork by boiling
rope trap on ground, made of a noose
But God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise; God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong.
And when the men of that place recognized Jesus, they sent word to all the surrounding country. People brought all their sick to him
grunt
He gave strict orders not to let anyone know about this, and told them to give her something to eat.
camote field
For whenever you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord's death until he comes.
medicinal plant used to treat skin diseases
8Finally, brothers, whatever is true, whatever is noble, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable--if anything is excellent or praiseworthy--think about such things.
You are doing the things your own father does." "We are not illegitimate children," they protested. "The only Father we have is God himself."
Slices
lower down
When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many basketfuls of pieces did you pick up?" "Twelve," they replied.
peaceful, free from trouble
to cut the neck of a pig or chicken
The people stood watching, and the rulers even sneered at him. They said, "He saved others; let him save himself if he is the Christ of God, the Chosen One."
Blowfly
For three and a half days some from every people, tribe, language and nation will gaze on their bodies and refuse them burial.
After much discussion, Peter got up and addressed them: “Brothers, you know that some time ago God made a choice among you that the Gentiles might hear from my lips the message of the gospel and believe.
kind of snake said to be poisonous
As Jesus was walking beside the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon called Peter and his brother Andrew. They were casting a net into the lake, for they were fishermen.
since you know that you will receive an inheritance from the Lord as a reward. It is the Lord Christ you are serving.
With her the kings of the earth committed adultery, and the inhabitants of the earth were intoxicated with the wine of her adulteries.”
Yet you have a few people in Sardis who have not soiled their clothes. They will walk with me, dressed in white, for they are worthy.
Rainbow.
Knotty (with many joints/knots)
If we are distressed, it is for your comfort and salvation; if we are comforted, it is for your comfort, which produces in you patient endurance of the same sufferings we suffer.
We know that we have come to know him if we keep his commands.
Amazed and perplexed, they asked one another, “What does this mean?”
When the Jews who had been with Mary in the house, comforting her, noticed how quickly she got up and went out, they followed her, supposing she was going to the tomb to mourn there.
“Leave her alone,” Jesus replied. “It was intended that she should save this perfume for the day of my burial.”
“You are my friends if you do what I command.”
so that
Rattan bowstring
When a table is bumped, the glasses which were on the table will tip over and fall.
To shake something out (like salt from a shaker)
I
As for a pig which is pregnant, her stomach alternately bulges as the unborn piglets move about.
He could not do any miracles there, except lay his hands on a few sick people and heal them.
The radio is on top of the table.
startled
God, who has called you into fellowship with his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, is faithful.
That which we step on are the steps.
Now there were some Greeks among those who went up to worship at the festival.
I hope, therefore, to send him as soon as I see how things go with me.
Kind of fish (same as malandog)
To plant
Stay there, eating and drinking whatever they give you, for the worker deserves his wages. Do not move around from house to house.
For John came to you to show you the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes did. And even after you saw this, you did not repent and believe him.
behind the ear
Then Peter came to himself and said, “Now I know without a doubt that the Lord has sent his angel and rescued me from Herod’s clutches and from everything the Jewish people were hoping would happen.”
"There will be weeping there, and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, but you yourselves thrown out.
Keep reminding them of these things. Warn them before God against quarreling about words; it is of no value, and only ruins those who listen.
“We gave you strict orders not to teach in this name,” he said. “Yet you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching and are determined to make us guilty of this man’s blood.”
A person has a circular growth of hair on his head which makes a swirl.
But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to where he was baptizing, he said to them: “You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
We will let him know.
To curl up
They forbid people to marry and order them to abstain from certain foods, which God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and who know the truth.
and brought him first to Annas, who was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, the high priest that year.
temporary
Type of long curved knife similar to a machete.
Something with holes; leaking item
to commit incest.
They had tails with stingers, like scorpions, and in their tails they had power to torment people for five months.
those who mourn, as if they did not; those who are happy, as if they were not; those who buy something, as if it were not theirs to keep;
to have sight restored for the blind
I’ll pour the tobacco shreds into your palm.
A kind of short cooking banana.
If you let the bird go, it will fly away.
In the morning, there was no small commotion among the soldiers as to what had become of Peter.
If you really keep the royal law found in Scripture, "Love your neighbor as yourself," you are doing right.
You are the ones who are mugtas who leave your companions behind
In Damascus the governor under King Aretas had the city of the Damascenes guarded in order to arrest me.
to be reached
Quit talking because I will get fed up with you and I will happen to react in an undesirable manner against you.
Forgive
kind of sugarcane
Rice granary
Then Peter remembered the word Jesus had spoken: “Before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times.” And he went outside and wept bitterly.
Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Were you baptized into the name of Paul?
And there appeared before them Elijah and Moses, who were talking with Jesus.
The man who had received five bags of gold went at once and put his money to work and gained five bags more.
If someone is fleeing, we pursue them so that we will catch up with them.
and a man with a shriveled hand was there. Looking for a reason to bring charges against Jesus, they asked him, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?”
industrious
For in the days before the flood, people were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, up to the day Noah entered the ark;
A pig makes a bed for a place where she will give birth.
as it is written: “God gave them a spirit of stupor, eyes that could not see and ears that could not hear, to this very day.”
The man who had received five bags of gold brought the other five. ‘Master,’ he said, ‘you entrusted me with five bags of gold. See, I have gained five more.’
cowardly person
Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord! It is no trouble for me to write the same things to you again, and it is a safeguard for you.
To catch on fire as field
Now Judas, who betrayed him, knew the place, because Jesus had often met there with his disciples.
Let both grow together until the harvest. At that time I will tell the harvesters: First collect the weeds and tie them in bundles to be burned; then gather the wheat and bring it into my barn.’”
In this self-confident boasting I am not talking as the Lord would, but as a fool.
ruin
Female young of an animal
posterity
To have someone hear what we have to say
lose, be lost
When the Sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard him were amazed.
I have given you authority to trample on snakes and scorpions and to overcome all the power of the enemy; nothing will harm you.
imitate
Whatever you do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the Lord, not for men,
Pointing to his disciples, he said, “Here are my mother and my brothers.
If you are caught on the trail at nighttime, it is difficult for you to get to your place because your pathway is dark.
Shame on you who leave your companions behind.
domestic duck.
Flour, if it doesn't pass through a sieve, it will become lumpy.
To be strong
steep
round reddish-brown seed of a vine
a covering, such as a blanket or mat
Forest, world.
The commandments, “You shall not commit adultery,” “You shall not murder,” “You shall not steal,” “You shall not covet,” and whatever other command there may be, are summed up in this one command: “Love your neighbor as yourself.”
Motion of an animal's foot when it scratches
“They will put you out of the synagogue; in fact, the time is coming when anyone who kills you will think they are offering a service to God.”
Then " 'they will say to the mountains, "Fall on us!" and to the hills, "Cover us!"
A kind of long, tubular snail shell used for making lime.
Jesus went through all the towns and villages, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom and healing every disease and sickness.
toothless
"Teacher," he declared, "all these I have kept since I was a boy."
They worship me in vain; their teachings are but rules taught by men.'
He’s blowing his nose.
To bubble
A kind of camote (yellowish-red inside and out)
acquainted
For if you forgive other people when they sin against you, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
Such large crowds gathered around him that he got into a boat and sat in it, while all the people stood on the shore.
But in order not to weary you further, I would request that you be kind enough to hear us briefly.
Red betel spittle
I hope to see you soon, and we will talk face to face.
Whoever tries to keep their life will lose it, and whoever loses their life will preserve it.
Design; pattern including color.
Father, glorify your name!"
How can you be so confident!
When he came to Jerusalem, he tried to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he really was a disciple.
In all this you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while you may have had to suffer grief in all kinds of trials.
When I saw him, I fell at his feet as though dead. Then he placed his right hand on me and said: “Do not be afraid. I am the First and the Last.
Then some stood up and gave this false testimony against him:
The person who worked at a another location, he received a message from his wife by cell phone [saying], “Carry through to return home to Kapalong next week.
And so John came, baptizing in the desert region and preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
who enjoyed God’s favor and asked that he might provide a dwelling place for the God of Jacob.
gather together to talk about something.
First, I will take your horse and then the next day you will go to my house and ask if I have anything to use as payment.
I thank my God every time I remember you.
care
But I have a baptism to undergo, and how distressed I am until it is completed!
digging stick
kind of banana, long and green
Jesus commanded them not to tell anyone. But the more he did so, the more they kept talking about it.
evil spirit causing illness
He must become greater; I must become less.”
For he himself is our peace, who has made the two groups one and has destroyed the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility,
make a circle or hoop out of wire or rattan
speak
Then Jesus told them, "You are going to have the light just a little while longer. Walk while you have the light, before darkness overtakes you. The man who walks in the dark does not know where he is going.
And if we know that he hears us-- whatever we ask--we know that we have what we asked of him.
To lie curled up (applies to animals)
A [unit] used in counting
To roll as a hoop.
The people were amazed at his teaching, because he taught them as one who had authority, not as the teachers of the law.
For the man who was miraculously healed was over forty years old.
Even sugar and salt will melt.
They only heard the report: “The man who formerly persecuted us is now preaching the faith he once tried to destroy.”
ravel, pull out, or unstring
When we clear debris from the yard, anything can be used to shove aside the fallen leaves and then we carry it to a far place.
leftover section
However, to the one who does not work but trusts God who justifies the ungodly, their faith is credited as righteousness.
Today in the town of David a Savior has been born to you; he is the Messiah, the Lord.
who was an attendant of the proconsul, Sergius Paulus. The proconsul, an intelligent man, sent for Barnabas and Saul because he wanted to hear the word of God.
Skin rash
“Jesus of Nazareth,” they replied. “I am he,” Jesus said. (And Judas the traitor was standing there with them.)
He/she is dizzy.
decorate
It's like a man going away: He leaves his house and puts his servants in charge, each with his assigned task, and tells the one at the door to keep watch.
As for those agitators, I wish they would go the whole way and emasculate themselves!
your
She went home and found her child lying on the bed, and the demon gone.
Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother’s eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye?
“My prayer is not that you take them out of the world but that you protect them from the evil one.”
An [example of a] curse: “You will not have reached one month and you [will] have died.”
Then Simon Peter came along behind him and went straight into the tomb. He saw the strips of linen lying there,
You are witnesses of these things.
shrewd
We would like to request please that you take this for us-excl please.
Long, straight mountain ridge
Behind the second curtain was a room called the Most Holy Place,
Then someone came and said, “Look! The men you put in jail are standing in the temple courts teaching the people.”
There was a oerson who was attacked by his enemy and was unable to restrain himself from resisting/fighting back.
In my judgment, she is happier if she stays as she is—and I think that I too have the Spirit of God.
We proclaim to you what we have seen and heard, so that you also may have fellowship with us. And our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son, Jesus Christ.
It is necessary that no one will doubt that which he is telling them.
Something white on an uncircumcised child's penis which separates the flesh from the foreskin and makes circumcision easier.
I'll work by the day for Aunt Domingga so that I can earn [some] money
regarding his Son, who as to his earthly life was a descendant of David,
If there is mucus, he will blow it out.
The eye is the lamp of the body. If your eyes are healthy, your whole body will be full of light.
blue
He answered, “I was sent only to the lost sheep of Israel.”
Walk noisily
[As for] the person who is making a house, he works hard to finish making it because he will move in.
Of any plant with many shoots, very strong, prolific, healthy; strong current of water.
stick used to hold onto when undergoing trial in the river
If the part of the dough offered as firstfruits is holy, then the whole batch is holy; if the root is holy, so are the branches.
But what does Scripture say? “Get rid of the slave woman and her son, for the slave woman’s son will never share in the inheritance with the free woman’s son.”
which said: “Write on a scroll what you see and send it to the seven churches: to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea.”
Only Luke is with me. Get Mark and bring him with you, because he is helpful to me in my ministry.
To initiate (growth or process)
Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and when he found him, he said, "Do you believe in the Son of Man?"
Chatter to the baby.
Through these he has given us his very great and precious promises, so that through them you may participate in the divine nature and escape the corruption in the world caused by evil desires.
"If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother, his wife and children, his brothers and sisters--yes, even his own life--he cannot be my disciple.
comfort
In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, in accordance with the riches of God’s grace
So then, if she has sexual relations with another man while her husband is still alive, she is called an adulteress. But if her husband dies, she is released from that law and is not an adulteress if she marries another man.
attend a wedding
Throw, toss
We purposely disturb our companion because we will eat now; we awaken him/her.
Whoever serves me must follow me; and where I am, my servant also will be. My Father will honor the one who serves me.
Begin; starting point
to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.
For Christ did not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel--not with words of human wisdom, lest the cross of Christ be emptied of its power.
sprinkle water on someone or something.
When it is nighttime, the frog places himself in the center of the eggs.
strong, healthy person
The shell and membrane of an egg
too big
The people who are cutting the airstrip are lined up side by side facing upriver.
push or sweep aside
Immediately the rooster crowed the second time. Then Peter remembered the word Jesus had spoken to him: "Before the rooster crows twice you will disown me three times." And he broke down and wept.
bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you.
If we have many animals, our living situation becomes easier because we won't experience hardship.
Jesus said to her, “Mary.” She turned toward him and cried out in Aramaic, “Rabboni!” (which means “Teacher”).
Can any one of you by worrying add a single hour to your life?
Salt
When the crowds heard Philip and saw the signs he performed, they all paid close attention to what he said.
When the soldiers crucified Jesus, they took his clothes, dividing them into four shares, one for each of them, with the undergarment remaining. This garment was seamless, woven in one piece from top to bottom.
The weapons we fight with are not the weapons of the world. On the contrary, they have divine power to demolish strongholds.
To make a wheezy sound in a person’s lungs (who has pneumonia)
They went out and preached that people should repent.
But when Jesus turned and looked at his disciples, he rebuked Peter. "Get behind me, Satan!" he said. "You do not have in mind the things of God, but the things of men."
He who overcomes will inherit all this, and I will be his God and he will be my son.
If you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask him!
As soon as Judas took the bread, Satan entered into him.
The [piece of] sharpened wood, that is the lever which is put underneath [the log which one intends to move].
Water which has a whirlpool, also has a center.
It is thundering loudly.
If there would be someone who would ask who your companion is, they would say, “We are just a married couple. We don't have any children yet.”
Glow
As for the person of good character, [he]  isn't a liar, he doesn't [start] scandals. He is afraid to do bad things. He humbles himself. If he is scolded, he doesn't let it bother him; he just [purposely] forgets it; he doesn't pay attention to it.
heed an order or custom
If, then, Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen have a grievance against anybody, the courts are open and there are proconsuls. They can press charges.
pull
Greet Ampliatus, my dear friend in the Lord.
Such a high priest meets our need-- one who is holy, blameless, pure, set apart from sinners, exalted above the heavens.
Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be satisfied. Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
When you sin against them in this way and wound their weak conscience, you sin against Christ.
large python
But whoever loves God is known by God.
If he knew that I was having a hard time, he would reduce [the amount] which he would have me pay back.
just as they were handed down to us by those who from the first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word.
I looked, and there before me was a white horse! Its rider held a bow, and he was given a crown, and he rode out as a conqueror bent on conquest.
As he was leaving the temple, one of his disciples said to him, "Look, Teacher! What massive stones! What magnificent buildings!"
The elder,
one-piece shirt and trousers, jumper suit
very many are bulging and breaking the soil
So be on your guard; I have told you everything ahead of time
Truly I tell you, you will not get out until you have paid the last penny.
To make a bed of vegetation, such as that made by a pig
As evening approached, there came a rich man from Arimathea, named Joseph, who had himself become a disciple of Jesus.
Hollow.
But first he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
untied
I saw in heaven another great and marvelous sign: seven angels with the seven last plagues--last, because with them God's wrath is completed.
catfish
If only for this life we have hope in Christ, we are to be pitied more than all men.
continuous crying (child)
To pump
to be out of control, compulsive behavior
One man's faith allows him to eat everything, but another man, whose faith is weak, eats only vegetables
And then what he will ask is, [whether] if he is able to borrow one thousand [pesos], if perhaps he will charge interest
Peter answered: “May your money perish with you, because you thought you could buy the gift of God with money!
The person who is first to speak, that is the one who initiates the discussion.
Straight
Speak to one another with psalms, hymns and spiritual songs. Sing and make music in your heart to the Lord,
If anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not take him into your house or welcome him.
But if I do it, even though you do not believe me, believe the miracles, that you may know and understand that the Father is in me, and I in the Father."
So we make it our goal to please him, whether we are at home in the body or away from it.
live
To clear field old rice plants, especially rice, to clear field for planting camotes.
Lights likewise also blink
The pig is my guarantee that I have reserved the horse.
Solid, durable
To throw or cast a spear
Though you do not know him, I know him. If I said I did not, I would be a liar like you, but I do know him and keep his word.
When the wind is strong, it's intensity will decrease
When we have been there for a day, we will continue to our true destination.
me
scrape rattan to make tyings.
Then the man who had received one bag of gold came. ‘Master,’ he said, ‘I knew that you are a hard man, harvesting where you have not sown and gathering where you have not scattered seed.
For if the dead are not raised, then Christ has not been raised either.
(About five thousand men were there.) But he said to his disciples, “Have them sit down in groups of about fifty each.”
In other words, it is not the children by physical descent who are God’s children, but it is the children of the promise who are regarded as Abraham’s offspring.
The excessively argumentative person won't quit talking.
When evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, ‘Call the workers and pay them their wages, beginning with the last ones hired and going on to the first.’
A person who is ill and can no longer be aroused is going into a coma.
When the rattan became chewed, that is [the meaning of the word] ogkatobtob.
David himself calls him 'Lord.' How then can he be his son?" The large crowd listened to him with delight.
They are inadvertently sitting next to each other.
Having tiny holes or leaks
a kind of wood
On the evening of that first day of the week, when the disciples were together, with the doors locked for fear of the Jewish leaders, Jesus came and stood among them and said, “Peace be with you!”
remove something by pulling it apart or by rmoving nails
They will throw dust on their heads, and with weeping and mourning cry out: " 'Woe! Woe, O great city, where all who had ships on the sea became rich through her wealth! In one hour she has been brought to ruin!
have chills as a person with malaria
I’ll collect the payment for my dried fish of a long time ago.
smooth, thornless vine or rattan which has fern-like leaves and a dark core which is used to make leg bands and bracelots.
If you are insulted because of the name of Christ, you are blessed, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you.
If someone arrives at someone's house who is hungry, he is given something to eat from the leftovers to temporarily satiate his hunger. Then the host/hostess cooks again that which he/she will feed their guests.
Murky
I’ll get you off by yourself.
“Do you hear what these children are saying?” they asked him. “Yes,” replied Jesus, “have you never read, ‘From the lips of children and infants you, Lord, have called forth your praise’?”
When the older people add up money, they go from a hundred to a thousand pesos.
With respect to sayote vegetable in the refrigerator, if it becomes thin and has shrunk, it is said to be shriveled.
We are out of betelchew.
Full of food
When they brought the colt to Jesus and threw their cloaks over it, he sat on it
monkey
Hit the chicken on the head with a death blow.
Surely you heard of him and were taught in him in accordance with the truth that is in Jesus.
come
Please forgive [that person].
One of them, named Agabus, stood up and through the Spirit predicted that a severe famine would spread over the entire Roman world. (This happened during the reign of Claudius.)
Whether it is high or short, thick or thin, if it is in the yard and surrounds a house, it is called a fense.
That monkey is a thief.
“There is no fear of God before their eyes.”
White cottony clouds
type of tree used to treat rice against bugs
Therefore consider carefully how you listen. Whoever has will be given more; whoever does not have, even what they think they have will be taken from them.”
When a gentle south wind began to blow, they thought they had obtained what they wanted; so they weighed anchor and sailed along the shore of Crete.
terrified person
hold within the hand
Goodness gracious that you travelled in the sunshine when it is exceedingly hot!
poke, as to get someone’s attention
But one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, who was later to betray him, objected,
The twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God, who was seated on the throne. And they cried: “Amen, Hallelujah!”
to plant
As for the Liboganon river, the cane there in the flat area is thick and its body is hard.
and soundness of speech that cannot be condemned, so that those who oppose you may be ashamed because they have nothing bad to say about us.
They’ll plunder our clothing after murdering us.
I wept and wept because no one was found who was worthy to open the scroll or look inside.
The cat leans back and over when it summer-salts when it plays with other cats.
Other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the plants.
Before very long, a wind of hurricane force, called the "northeaster," swept down from the island.
scratch with claws, as a dog or chicken
To draw towards oneself, hold on to, guard jealously as of newlyweds, children, food.
Blessed and holy are those who have part in the first resurrection. The second death has no power over them, but they will be priests of God and of Christ and will reign with him for a thousand years.
(All the people, even the tax collectors, when they heard Jesus’ words, acknowledged that God’s way was right, because they had been baptized by John.
jump down.
The foundations of the city walls were decorated with every kind of precious stone. The first foundation was jasper, the second sapphire, the third chalcedony, the fourth emerald,
repeatedly come back
To ask someone privately.
He replied, “If you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea,’ and it will obey you.
True, correct; to verify or witness something as true; to use something as a guarantee.
He, she, enclitic source pronoun, it; his, hers, its (of inanimate object)
So the last will be first, and the first will be last.”
"Father, I want those you have given me to be with me where I am, and to 1607 see my glory, the glory you have given me because you loved me before the creation of the world.
As for us, we cannot help speaking about what we have seen and heard.”
pit
Large eyes
A dog ran away with it.
Even though father agree to it; I won’t.
I appeal to you, brothers and sisters, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that all of you agree with one another in what you say and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be perfectly united in mind and thought.
and Jason has welcomed them into his house. They are all defying Caesar’s decrees, saying that there is another king, one called Jesus.”
About noon the following day as they were on their journey and approaching the city, Peter went up on the roof to pray.
When Jesus landed and saw a large crowd, he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. So he began teaching them many things.
dish up food
marry as a child
I am saying this for your own good, not to restrict you, but that you may live in a right way in undivided devotion to the Lord.
“Why were you searching for me?” he asked. “Didn’t you know I had to be in my Father’s house?”
“I am the Alpha and the Omega,” says the Lord God, “who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty.”
Then Peter said, “Silver or gold I do not have, but what I do have I give you. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, walk.”
The cone-shaped fish trap is made from bamboo which is one way to catch water life.
slap one's own head
whatever
squint
Then Judas (not Judas Iscariot) said, "But, Lord, why do you intend to show yourself to us and not to the world?"
For it is written: "I will destroy the wisdom of the wise; the intelligence of the intelligent I will frustrate."
"You believe at last!" Jesus answered.
sting
"Who has ever given to God, that God should repay him?"
angry, upset, moody, or depressed
If you are the owner of a sack of corn which you will divide in half, you will give half of it.
If God is glorified in him, God will glorify the Son in himself, and will glorify him at once.
But whatever was to my profit I now consider loss for the sake of Christ.
We are just resident aliens here on earth.
drum made of hollowed-out tree covered with deerskin
The Spirit you received does not make you slaves, so that you live in fear again; rather, the Spirit you received brought about your adoption to sonship. And by him we cry, “Abba, Father.”
What relation to Lugtom is Sanglit?
He answered, “‘Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind’; and, ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’”
smell of burning hair or flesh
"Does our law condemn anyone without first hearing him to find out what he is doing?"
arrive at a destination
“Who are you, Lord?” Saul asked. “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting,” he replied.
Don't slouch; don't be bent over.
When the Gentiles heard this, they were glad and honored the word of the Lord; and all who were appointed for eternal life believed.
Elena's mother said, inquiring of Manggoni, “Do you have a granary for your rice?”
And you say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our ancestors, we would not have taken part with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’
Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud.
Everyone who does evil hates the light, and will not come into the light for fear that their deeds will be exposed.
He who was seated on the throne said, “I am making everything new!” Then he said, “Write this down, for these words are trustworthy and true.”
For I could wish that I myself were cursed and cut off from Christ for the sake of my people, those of my own race,
There was someone who wanted a fish trap. He asked, “Would it be OK with you if I traded a chicken for it?”
All the people saw this and began to mutter, "He has gone to be the guest of a 'sinner.' "
Do your best to present yourself to God as one approved, a workman who does not need to be ashamed and who correctly handles the word of truth.
In reading this, then, you will be able to understand my insight into the mystery of Christ,
We will hunker down if we hide.
The Manobo people, when they carry a lunch of rice, they wrap it up with a banana leaf.
I will show him how much he must suffer for my name.”
The time came when the beggar died and the angels carried him to Abraham’s side. The rich man also died and was buried.
I smoked it (meat) so that it wouldn’t get wormy.
kind of tobacco
We should not commit sexual immorality, as some of them did—and in one day twenty-three thousand of them died.
search out a trail
Just my size.
When Jesus saw her, he called her forward and said to her, "Woman, you are set free from your infirmity."
play
Out of the same mouth come praise and cursing. My brothers, this should not be.
Anyone, then, who knows the good he ought to do and doesn't do it, sins.
Remember
To shred
Do not judge, or you too will be judged.
But Jesus, knowing their evil intent, said, “You hypocrites, why are you trying to trap me?
But about the Son he says, “Your throne, O God, will last forever and ever; a scepter of justice will be the scepter of your kingdom.
There is a child whose teeth are far apart. His teeth have open spaces between them.
The Pharisees and the teachers of the law were looking for a reason to accuse Jesus, so they watched him closely to see if he would heal on the Sabbath.
leave a tree standing when cutting down others
and the people went out to see what had happened. When they came to Jesus, they found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting at Jesus’ feet, dressed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
tie bamboos together
Then Jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples:
"You do not want to leave too, do you?" Jesus asked the Twelve.
A house, if it only has glass windows, they are transparent because we can see through to the other side because our view is unobstructed.
Your other younger sibling.
playful
If we cross a river, if we are not able to discover the shallow places because the water is bubbly, we will be carried away by the current to where it is deep. We will have to swim.
Jesus replied, “They do not need to go away. You give them something to eat.”
As for younger widows, do not put them on such a list. For when their sensual desires overcome their dedication to Christ, they want to marry.
She has no veins yet.
A child who was continuously crying because he cried for his mother who was weeding a field, has an illness and headache caused by crying because he is becoming ill.
long, tall
Something that is able to make one feel better.
For this people’s heart has become calloused; they hardly hear with their ears, and they have closed their eyes. Otherwise they might see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their hearts and turn, and I would heal them.’
edible grub
John wore clothing made of camel's hair, with a leather belt around his waist, and he ate locusts and wild honey.
Noisy
I think it is right to refresh your memory as long as I live in the tent of this body,
remember that at that time you were separate from Christ, excluded from citizenship in Israel and foreigners to the covenants of the promise, without hope and without God in the world.
When we heat water, we set it aside because we will allow the water to cool off.
surprisingly
Plug [Cover??] the waterpole.
And again, "Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles, and sing praises to him, all you peoples."
wisdom
If the tail of a puppy is tipped with white, people will not make a pet of it because they think it is bad luck.
But he replied, "Lord, I am ready to go with you to prison and to death."
In those days John the Baptist came, preaching in the wilderness of Judea
For man did not come from woman, but woman from man;
Therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey its evil desires.
He went to him and bandaged his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. Then he put the man on his own donkey, brought him to an inn and took care of him.
Do not merely listen to the word, and so deceive yourselves. Do what it says.
Jesus answered, "If I want him to remain alive until I return, what is that to you? You must follow me."
When he was placed outside, Pharaoh’s daughter took him and brought him up as her own son.
When you come together, it is not the Lord's Supper you eat,
be wiped out
go through
Jesus stopped and called them. “What do you want me to do for you?” he asked.
As Jesus went on from there, he saw a man named Matthew sitting at the tax collector’s booth. “Follow me,” he told him, and Matthew got up and followed him.
tangled
Just yesterday my horse gave birth.
His master replied, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You have been faithful with a few things; I will put you in charge of many things. Come and share your master’s happiness!’
brothers-in-law
He can't cover yet
"I am not possessed by a demon," said Jesus, "but I honor my Father and you dishonor me.
You have condemned and murdered innocent men, who were not opposing you.
I was glad when Stephanas, Fortunatus and Achaicus arrived, because they have supplied what was lacking from you.
The grace of the Lord Jesus be with you.
lost
He has a steward who is the guardian of the plants and that is Kalayag.
To try to arouse someone, as a person who is unconscious.
Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You travel over land and sea to win a single convert, and when you have succeeded, you make them twice as much a child of hell as you are.
So it is written: "The first man Adam became a living being" ; the last Adam, a lifegiving spirit.
Then another horse came out, a fiery red one. Its rider was given power to take peace from the earth and to make people kill each other. To him was given a large sword.
Toss aside
When Jesus heard this, he was amazed at him, and turning to the crowd following him, he said, “I tell you, I have not found such great faith even in Israel.”
He claimed that it was his own saw.
As for Father's house, it is struck by the light of the sun. When it rises in the morning, it is very much inadvertently struck by the rays of the sun.
ridgepole
So the soldiers cut the ropes that held the lifeboat and let it fall away.
Since you died with Christ to the basic principles of this world, why, as though you still belonged to it, do you submit to its rules:
But Paul said to the officers: "They beat us publicly without a trial, even though we are Roman citizens, and threw us into prison. And now do they want to get rid of us quietly? No! Let them come themselves and escort us out."
After they had heard the king, they went on their way, and the star they had seen when it rose went ahead of them until it stopped over the place where the child was.  When they saw the star, they were overjoyed.
The baliok tree is red and its body is very hard and is used to make axe handles, spear shafts and extensions to a house because it doesn't get holes from the bokbok insect.
Dwarf
A person who was wounded took a piece of material and wrapped it around his wound.
Roof poles
snap in two
cross-like symbol used as a field marker
Examine
Paul stood up, motioned with his hand and said: “Fellow Israelites and you Gentiles who worship God, listen to me!
Our agreement in advance was that whoever has stamina to come along, he/she will be chosen.
When they came to the other disciples, they saw a large crowd around them and the teachers of the law arguing with them.
Swelling
balete tree
And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple robe and put his own clothes on him. Then they led him out to crucify him.
And do not call anyone on earth ‘father,’ for you have one Father, and he is in heaven.
Banana blossom
take a break (by changing location and activities away from home)
Loincloth, g-string.
To think
I tell you, I will not drink from this fruit of the vine from now on until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom.”
We sway back and forth when walking.
They saw what seemed to be tongues of fire that separated and came to rest on each of them.
I will remove the horse from the village so that it can choose what it will eat. We remove the horse from the village.
Paul answered: “I am now standing before Caesar’s court, where I ought to be tried. I have not done any wrong to the Jews, as you yourself know very well.”
Even if I should choose to boast, I would not be a fool, because I would be speaking the truth. But I refrain, so no one will think more of me than is warranted by what I do or say.
a root of kind of the kamulu vine used for kuglung strings
Be stubborn
At that time Jesus went through the grainfields on the Sabbath. His disciples were hungry and began to pick some heads of grain and eat them.
Menstruate
small bat
Regarding a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space [made from the lift].
We fit the lid on the shaft  of the ballpen.
And no wonder, for Satan himself masquerades as an angel of light.
He sighed deeply and said, "Why does this generation ask for a miraculous sign? I tell you the truth, no sign will be given to it."
And when the Chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the crown of glory that will never fade away. toward one another, because, "God opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble."
sold a field he owned and brought the money and put it at the apostles’ feet.
to explain
Then he sent another servant to them; they struck this man on the head and treated him shamefully.
And he said to him, “I will give you all their authority and splendor; it has been given to me, and I can give it to anyone I want to.
remember this: Whoever turns a sinner from the error of his way will save him from death and cover over a multitude of sins.
to Deliberately exposed to smoke
When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed. Such things must happen, but the end is still to come.
When Jesus had finished these parables, he moved on from there.
“I have spoken openly to the world,” Jesus replied. “I always taught in synagogues or at the temple, where all the Jews come together. I said nothing in secret.”
Thus they bring judgment on themselves, because they have broken their first pledge.
So then, no more boasting about men! All things are yours,
Him who overcomes I will make a pillar in the temple of my God. Never again will he leave it. I will write on him the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which is coming down out of heaven from my God; and I will also write on him my new name.
To be afflicted with a sinus-like headache caused by withheld information.
"Where did this man get these things?" they asked. "What's this wisdom that has been given him, that he even does miracles! Isn't this the carpenter? Isn't this Mary's son and the brother of James, Joseph, Judas and Simon? Aren't his sisters here with us?" And they took offense at him.
When you send me on an errand, Kunsay will be the one to carry it out.
and after taking some food, he regained his strength. Saul spent several days with the disciples in Damascus.
In him and through faith in him we may approach God with freedom and confidence.
Domesticate
sprained
“I will remain in the world no longer, but they are still in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, protect them by the power of your name, the name you gave me, so that they may be one as we are one.”
I became so involved with my sewing, [that] I forgot to cook supper.
When they came to Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church and the apostles and elders, to whom they reported everything God had done through them.
"Do not stop him," Jesus said, "for whoever is not against you is for you."
because we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love you have for all God’s people—
He is able to deal gently with those who are ignorant and are going astray, since he himself is subject to weakness.
All palm trees, when they finish bearing fruit, they die and basiow is what it is called because the inner core is rotting; it is becoming hollow.
An argument started among the disciples as to which of them would be the greatest.
be angry
But this is to fulfill what is written in their Law: 'They hated me without reason.'
Kind of round water snail.
If the accusation is true that a person has done wrong, they will pay up front for the settlement of one who has sinned.
sacrifice a pig when fasting
This calls for wisdom. If anyone has insight, let him calculate the number of the beast, for it is man's number. His number is 666
Cut-down cogon grass.
To divide into equal portions.
Bless your heart for feeling lonely for me.
Soap.
tip
I will not let them return home
They will be the same.
Who is the liar? It is the man who denies that Jesus is the Christ. Such a man is the antichrist--he denies the Father and the Son.
Turn on one's side, edge
wide-headed collar
Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, but he on whom it falls will be crushed."
When they heard this, they were amazed. So they left him and went away.
News about him spread quickly over the whole region of Galilee.
point with the fist in the direction of significant dove calls.
Nose mucus.
But there are those who keep coming back with their request who cannot express what they [want to] say.
This they did, sending their gift to the elders by Barnabas and Saul.
smooth
And he said, “The Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests and the teachers of the law, and he must be killed and on the third day be raised to life.”
He didn't catch the ball which was thrown because it passed him but another person was able to catch it.
God “will repay each person according to what they have done.”
He answered, “Haven’t you read what David did when he and his companions were hungry?
euphemism for private parts
spread out; open to display, open, as a flower
“Do not be amazed at this, for a time is coming when all who are in their graves will hear his voice
If he ignores this, he himself will be ignored.
Are you greater than our father Abraham? He died, and so did the prophets. Who do you think you are?"
For the Son of Man in his day will be like the lightning, which flashes and lights up the sky from one end to the other.
To become dried up
So then, each of us will give an account of himself to God.
herald
twisted
involved
Bag of waters
In the presence of God and of Christ Jesus, who will judge the living and the dead, and in view of his appearing and his kingdom, I give you this charge:
Term of address to an unmarried man, used by women and between men as a sign of respect.
That is why, for Christ’s sake, I delight in weaknesses, in insults, in hardships, in persecutions, in difficulties. For when I am weak, then I am strong.
For in my inner being I delight in God’s law;
which some have professed and in so doing have departed from the faith. Grace be with you all.
If they want to inquire about something, they should ask their own husbands at home; for it is disgraceful for a woman to speak in the church.
Enough
Hold onto this camote.
When Ananias heard this, he fell down and died. And great fear seized all who heard what had happened.
cut off
The Lord turned and looked straight at Peter. Then Peter remembered the word the Lord had spoken to him: "Before the rooster crows today, you will disown me three times."
Are they not the ones who are slandering the noble name of him to whom you belong?
You hypocrites! Isaiah was right when he prophesied about you:
We have found this man to be a troublemaker, stirring up riots among the Jews all over the world. He is a ringleader of the Nazarene sect.
Woe to you, teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites! You give a tenth of your spices—mint, dill and cumin. But you have neglected the more important matters of the law—justice, mercy and faithfulness. You should have practiced the latter, without neglecting the former.
A necklace; a bead.
“Who touched me?” Jesus asked. When they all denied it, Peter said, “Master, the people are crowding and pressing against you.”
mature
Then another sign appeared in heaven: an enormous red dragon with seven heads and ten horns and seven crowns on its heads.
When we rode a jeep from Valencia, at Baguntaas it was halfway to Nasuli. That is, it was in the middle of the ride.
I must go on boasting. Although there is nothing to be gained, I will go on to visions and revelations from the Lord.
Others replied, "No, he deceives the people." But no one would say anything publicly about him for fear of the Jews.
which is really no gospel at all. Evidently some people are throwing you into confusion and are trying to pervert the gospel of Christ.
Any bird of prey including hawks/eagles and nocturnal owls
To blow off (by wind)
If there is someone who agrees to commit himself to kill someone else, that is the one who will be brave enough to take revenge against an enemy.
that God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ, not counting people’s sins against them. And he has committed to us the message of reconciliation.
"When you see Jerusalem being surrounded by armies, you will know that its desolation is near.
When it was suppertime already, he happened to think about his family and [wondered] what they might have to eat this afternoon.
It hurts if the hair gets pulled.
The woman you saw is the great city that rules over the kings of the earth."
Then he sent other servants to them, more than the first time, and the tenants treated them the same way.
roll over
lose something by misplacing it
Not that we lord it over your faith, but we work with you for your joy, because it is by faith you stand firm.
Split up that piece of wood; cut it in half, One splits it length-wise with the grain.
If we experience swelling that has not yet burst, our lymph nodes in the groin will hurt.
earth
awaken
kick
mistake someone for another person
The meaning of sug-ut is there is no charge for that horse because it was just given [free] to the child.
"The servant came back and reported this to his master. Then the owner of the house became angry and ordered his servant, 'Go out quickly into the streets and alleys of the town and bring in the poor, the crippled, the blind and the lame.'
The uncle of the young man forced his nephew into a bad situation because he had him marry someone for whom he did not yet have a desire to marry.
enclose, make an enclosure
A woman should learn in quietness and full submission.
The birds of prey, that is the name of the birds which prey, swooping up chicks, snakes, and water creatures.
When the discussion of the gathered people was finished, they left for home. There were no people left.
"As for the person who hears my words but does not keep them, I do not judge him. For I did not come to judge the world, but to save it.
When [the swamp] is cut, it will dry up and the rice will be good because it will develop well.
The first man was of the dust of the earth, the second man from heaven.
receive.
And when the south wind blows, you say, 'It's going to be hot,' and it is.
uvula
yes
sound of many people stepping on flooring
Protrude
kind of shrimp.
Then I heard what sounded like a great multitude, like the roar of rushing waters and like loud peals of thunder, shouting: “Hallelujah! For our Lord God Almighty reigns.
Get out of the way; step to the side of the path so a horse or person may go by.
the world was not worthy of them. They wandered in deserts and mountains, and in caves and holes in the ground.
I want you to recall the words spoken in the past by the holy prophets and the command given by our Lord and Savior through your apostles.
There in front of him was a man suffering from dropsy.
When you enter a town and are welcomed, eat what is set before you.
Do not treat prophecies with contempt
The person who is strong-willed, he resists any kind of advice.
Fillet
The soldiers led Jesus away into the palace (that is, the Praetorium) and called together the whole company of soldiers.
When tempted, no one should say, "God is tempting me." For God cannot be tempted by evil, nor does he tempt anyone;
Marriage should be honored by all, and the marriage bed kept pure, for God will judge the adulterer and all the sexually immoral.
When Judas, who had betrayed him, saw that Jesus was condemned, he was seized with remorse and returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and the elders.
Peter stayed in Joppa for some time with a tanner named Simon.
Then those also who have fallen asleep in Christ are lost.
calm area of water, deep pool
Jesus said this to indicate the kind of death by which Peter would glorify God. Then he said to him, “Follow me!”
And so you became a model to all the believers in Macedonia and Achaia.
“I have revealed you to those whom you gave me out of the world. They were yours; you gave them to me and they have obeyed your word.”
When it was daylight, the magistrates sent their officers to the jailer with the order: "Release those men."
Don’t do it yet.
But I tell you that anyone who looks at a woman lustfully has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
Now Peter was sitting out in the courtyard, and a servant girl came to him. “You also were with Jesus of Galilee,” she said.
People of the Umayan river area.
Stunted rice
stab oneself
Tell us then, what is your opinion? Is it right to pay the imperial tax to Caesar or not?”
Immediately her bleeding stopped and she felt in her body that she was freed from her suffering.
able to see clearly and well
Our house was sheltered by the library.
Night, nighttime
Gods
today
Jesus told them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field.
What you saw was the house.
If you are not disciplined (and everyone undergoes discipline), then you are illegitimate children and not true sons.
width
repeat the exact words over and over
slide
By these waters also the world of that time was deluged and destroyed.
They sent their disciples to him along with the Herodians. “Teacher,” they said, “we know that you are a man of integrity and that you teach the way of God in accordance with the truth. You aren’t swayed by others, because you pay no attention to who they are.
To work by the month
But when he saw the person who was wounded, he detoured. He passed by on the other side of the path.
Granted. But they were broken off because of unbelief, and you stand by faith. Do not be arrogant, but be afraid.
The girl clamped her teeth on her brother's index finger.
I’m your housegirl.
Many will say to me on that day, ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name and in your name drive out demons and in your name perform many miracles?’
For in the same way you judge others, you will be judged, and with the measure you use, it will be measured to you.
Why did you falsely accuse me of doing something when I certainly did not do something wrong.
If anyone sees his brother commit a sin that does not lead to death, he should pray and God will give him life. I refer to those whose sin does not lead to death. There is a sin that leads to death. I am not saying that he should pray about that.
hard worker
"Sir," they said, "from now on give us this bread."
Why is my language not clear to you? Because you are unable to hear what I say.
They arrived again in Jerusalem, and while Jesus was walking in the temple courts, the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders came to him.
Some time later, Jesus went up to Jerusalem for one of the Jewish festivals.
That clay soil is red and malleable. It is used to make clay pots.
A warrior's knife used to kill people
Cornerpost of the house.
and sang the song of Moses the servant of God and the song of the Lamb: "Great and marvelous are your deeds, Lord God Almighty. Just and true are your ways, King of the ages.
Do not be hasty in the laying on of hands, and do not share in the sins of others. Keep yourself pure.
The person who has a rice field that is about to be harvested, clears an area around the field to keep wild pigs out.
We have come to share in Christ, if indeed we hold firmly to the end the confidence we had at first.
Or don’t you know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?
When there is a meeting, [many] people come together and see each other.
If you won't take care [of the children], search for something to eat!
To trip over something
Filled with compassion, Jesus reached out his hand and touched the man. "I am willing," he said. "Be clean!"
Cut out the knot.
insult
Our shoulders may be put out of joint by carrying a heavy load of waterpoles
slash up into pieces
twisted or turned around, as of the meaning of a statement
We can just sow the seed carelessly if we have lots of seed.
enmity toward
In the same way, count yourselves dead to sin but alive to God in Christ Jesus.
By faith Noah, when warned about things not yet seen, in holy fear built an ark to save his family. By his faith he condemned the world and became heir of the righteousness that is in keeping with faith.
At once the Spirit sent him out into the desert,
Pencil sharpener.
But food does not bring us near to God; we are no worse if we do not eat, and no better if we do.
We have much to say about this, but it is hard to make it clear to you because you no longer try to understand.
If a horse doesn't want to travel, it continually rears up as it tries to shake off the reins as it walks.
As we have already said, so now I say again: If anybody is preaching to you a gospel other than what you accepted, let them be under God’s curse!
My bottom has become flattened
A woman in that town who lived a sinful life learned that Jesus was eating at the Pharisee’s house, so she came there with an alabaster jar of perfume.
Intestinal worm of a fish.
crippled
top of a shield
For two whole years Paul stayed there in his own rented house and welcomed all who came to see him.
When he came near the place where the road goes down the Mount of Olives, the whole crowd of disciples began joyfully to praise God in loud voices for all the miracles they had seen:
Someone will ask, “Where is the eating place here?” And then we will point it out [saying], “The eating place is on the other side.”
pay back
He made the cloth like new.
“The one who enters by the gate is the shepherd of the sheep.”
To be drawn together (people to a celebration or event)
But the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them, and on that day they will fast.
If any of you has a dispute with another, dare he take it before the ungodly for judgment instead of before the saints?
holding on to faith and a good conscience, which some have rejected and so have suffered shipwreck with regard to the faith.
When Pilate heard this, he was even more afraid,
so no one can say that you were baptized into my name.
kind of hornbill
I say this to shame you. Is it possible that there is nobody among you wise enough to judge a dispute between believers?
Wind that [blows] in a circle.
The kingdom of heaven is like treasure hidden in a field. When a man found it, he hid it again, and then in his joy went and sold all he had and bought that field.
A kind of spear
The earth is bumpy because it has many mountains.
What agreement is there between the temple of God and idols? For we are the temple of the living God. As God has said: "I will live with them and walk among them, and I will be their God, and they will be my people."
Again Jesus said, “Simon son of John, do you love me?” He answered, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.” Jesus said, “Take care of my sheep.”
An herbal preparation to prevent conception
discern
The commander came up and arrested him and ordered him to be bound with two chains. Then he asked who he was and what he had done.
Rather, he must be hospitable, one who loves what is good, who is self-controlled, upright, holy and disciplined.
Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers.
And those he predestined, he also called; those he called, he also justified; those he justified, he also glorified.
“I am not referring to all of you; I know those I have chosen. But this is to fulfill this passage of Scripture: ‘He who shared my bread has turned against me.’”
When the two disciples heard him say this, they followed Jesus.
Just then there appeared before them Moses and Elijah, talking with Jesus.
On the appointed day Herod, wearing his royal robes, sat on his throne and delivered a public address to the people.
lose one’s baby teeth
I am not commanding you, but I want to test the sincerity of your love by comparing it with the earnestness of others.
Think about me. [Take care of me.]
gently
Tobacco
spring of water
serve food during mourning
She says that her rice will be wasted because she cannot finish weeding the field.
We pour water when we want to drink.
To touch each other
Then Mary took about a pint of pure nard, an expensive perfume; she poured it on Jesus’ feet and wiped his feet with her hair. And the house was filled with the fragrance of the perfume.
I ask you, therefore, not to be discouraged because of my sufferings for you, which are your glory.
About three hours later his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.
The person who was blind whom Jesus treated and then he was able to see, it was like an amazing thing because Jesus did some miraculous.
inside
He has a wife on each arm.
We will be quick to return home because the sun will go down.
The men of Nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and now one greater than Jonah is here.
If anyone will not welcome you or listen to your words, leave that home or town and shake the dust off your feet.
The goal of this command is love, which comes from a pure heart and a good conscience and a sincere faith.
Come here because I will listen to your stomach if your stomach growls. Maybe you have worms.
germs that spread disease
He has lost connection with the Head, from whom the whole body, supported and held together by its ligaments and sinews, grows as God causes it to grow.
swollen bruise on the forehead.
Chicken
small melon
descend to the river from the mountains.
He’s a child who doesn’t stop
Every good and perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of the heavenly lights, who does not change like shifting shadows.
But the angel said to him: “Do not be afraid, Zechariah; your prayer has been heard. Your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to call him John.
No one can serve two masters. Either you will hate the one and love the other, or you will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money.”
Ever since I was a child, I have always lived in Mansalinao.
What is more, I consider everything a loss compared to the surpassing greatness of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord, for whose sake I have lost all things. I consider them rubbish, that I may gain Christ
We didn’t know.
Husbands, in the same way be considerate as you live with your wives, and treat them with respect as the weaker partner and as heirs with you of the gracious gift of life, so that nothing will hinder your prayers.
So you also, when you have done everything you were told to do, should say, ‘We are unworthy servants; we have only done our duty.’”
stumble over
"Abraham is our father," they answered. "If you were Abraham's children," said Jesus, "then you would
Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
At dawn he appeared again in the temple courts, where all the people gathered around him, and he sat down to teach them.
A fan palm
We’re offended by the cold.
They’ll make her nervous if they’re noisy.
When the raft happened to pass through the shallow area, the rattan with which it was tied together became chewed and was broken off by the rocks.
immerse in water
small, ruffly, light brown edible fungus
I urge you, therefore, to reaffirm your love for him.
should
noon
Read.
I have been claimed by that person; he regards me as his younger brother.
Immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus, praising God. When all the people saw it, they also praised God.
Now if a child can be circumcised on the Sabbath so that the law of Moses may not be broken, why are you angry with me for healing the whole man on the Sabbath?
Those who were standing near Paul said, “How dare you insult God’s high priest!”
Glisten
A person who stuffs his mouth with food makes a fistful of food and feeds himself.
split a tree
If we measure the jump, we will see who can jump the highest when we leap from a running start.
I was not able to restrain my anger at that person.
knot a thread
Red suits you.
to starve
to prepare God's people for works of service, so that the body of Christ may be built up
The law is only a shadow of the good things that are coming--not the realities themselves. For this reason it can never, by the same sacrifices repeated endlessly year after year, make perfect those who draw near to worship.
You will be hated by everyone because of me, but the one who stands firm to the end will be saved.
What if he did this to make the riches of his glory known to the objects of his mercy, whom he prepared in advance for glory—
Nevertheless, each person should live as a believer in whatever situation the Lord has assigned to them, just as God has called them. This is the rule I lay down in all the churches.
The width of the body to the beetle is nearly one inch.
If we cross a river, if we cannot locate a shallow area because the water is swift, we will be carried away by the current to a deep area.
but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom also he made the universe.
short baliti tree (bears fruit for birds)
false,
But you know that he appeared so that he might take away our sins. And in him is no sin.
Hold your lips tight together
With many similar parables Jesus spoke the word to them, as much as they could understand.
They will be punished with everlasting destruction and shut out from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might
clear one’s throat.
approximately
The sap of the dugu-an tree stains
Therefore, in the present case I advise you: Leave these men alone! Let them go! For if their purpose or activity is of human origin, it will fail.
Offspring of a mudfish
spokesperson or representative of a higher leader
We know that anyone born of God does not continue to sin; the one who was born of God keeps him safe, and the evil one cannot harm him.
Peter replied, “Even if all fall away on account of you, I never will.”
burn
When they had all had enough to eat, he said to his disciples, "Gather the pieces that are left over. Let nothing be wasted."
Meanwhile a Jew named Apollos, a native of Alexandria, came to Ephesus. He was a learned man, with a thorough knowledge of the Scriptures.
Small nut from a type of rattan which is chewed with betelnut.
They all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
Yet he did not waver through unbelief regarding the promise of God, but was strengthened in his faith and gave glory to God,
But someone will say, "You have faith; I have deeds."
They sailed to the region of the Gerasenes, which is across the lake from Galilee.  When Jesus stepped ashore, he was met by a demon-possessed man from the town. For a long time this man had not worn clothes or lived in a house, but had lived in the tombs.  When he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell at his feet, shouting at the top of his voice, “What do you want with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you, don’t torture me!”
Jesus said to her, "Your brother will rise again."
but Peter had to wait outside at the door. The other disciple, who was known to the high priest, came back, spoke to the servant girl on duty there and brought Peter in.
sit with legs extended
They are from the world and therefore speak from the viewpoint of the world, and the world listens to them.
Jesus looked around and said to his disciples, "How hard it is for the rich to enter the kingdom of God!"
Take the bag of gold from him and give it to the one who has ten bags.
To pant (dogs)
large bamboo slat container for carrying grain
By this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another."
split lip
Therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the Lord’s will is.
for which I am an ambassador in chains. Pray that I may declare it fearlessly, as I should.
Here is a trustworthy saying: If we died with him, we will also live with him;
Jesus answered, “Even if I testify on my own behalf, my testimony is valid, for I know where I came from and where I am going. But you have no idea where I come from or where I am going.”
from whom every family in heaven and on earth derives its name.
I won’t sleep even with you
submerged just under the surface of the water
When [an area] has been cut and [the trees] sprout again and after a long time the trees become old, it has become a secondary forest.
They replied, "The Lord needs it."
who have wandered away from the truth. They say that the resurrection has already taken place, and they destroy the faith of some.
When I took the termite dust and sprinkled it outside, I scattered it on the ground.
There they offered Jesus wine to drink, mixed with gall; but after tasting it, he refused to drink it.
At the time that someone was drowned at the pool, there were many who were aware who were weren't able to go to the rescue. They were stymied and unable to move.
But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law who belonged to their sect complained to his disciples, "Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and 'sinners'?"
But they will have to give account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.
bumpy from insect bites
“A farmer went out to sow his seed. As he was scattering the seed, some fell along the path; it was trampled on, and the birds ate it up.
to be busy
disturbance or interruption
repeatedly topple
Therefore, since we have a great high priest who has ascended into heaven, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold firmly to the faith we profess.
so that there should be no division in the body, but that its parts should have equal concern for each other.
Paul wanted to take him along on the journey, so he circumcised him because of the Jews who lived in that area, for they all knew that his father was a Greek.
“Which of the two do you want me to release to you?” asked the governor. “Barabbas,” they answered.
For breasts to become engorged with milk
But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far away have been brought near by the blood of Christ.
Now I urge you to take some food. You need it to survive. Not one of you will lose a single hair from his head."
A person whose eye gets something in it cannot open his eye.
Jesus reached out his hand and touched the man. “I am willing,” he said. “Be clean!” And immediately the leprosy left him.
Then Jesus' mother and brothers arrived. Standing outside, they sent someone in to call him.
Day after day every priest stands and performs his religious duties; again and again he offers the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins.
But the Jerusalem that is above is free, and she is our mother.
For this reason Christ is the mediator of a new covenant, that those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance--now that he has died as a ransom to set them free from the sins committed under the first covenant.
“Where is this man?” they asked him. “I don’t know,” he said.
Now then, at the resurrection, whose wife will she be of the seven, since all of them were married to her?”
Now I want you to realize that the head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is man, and the head of Christ is God.
We’ll point out the chickens to her later on.
pull head back by yanking the hair.
His disciples replied, “Lord, if he sleeps, he will get better.”
Aware of their discussion, Jesus asked, “You of little faith, why are you talking among yourselves about having no bread?
Grieve, mourn and wail. Change your laughter to mourning and your joy to gloom.
do something wholeheartedly.
In the same way, the Spirit helps us in our weakness. We do not know what we ought to pray for, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us through wordless groans.
Urinate
Jesus replied, “Truly I tell you, if you have faith and do not doubt, not only can you do what was done to the fig tree, but also you can say to this mountain, ‘Go, throw yourself into the sea,’ and it will be done.
When the owner is about to begin [harvesting his] field, then he has many people helping him so that in about three days [they] can finish harvesting it.
As evening approached, the disciples came to him and said, “This is a remote place, and it’s already getting late. Send the crowds away, so they can go to the villages and buy themselves some food.”
If that is how God clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, will he not much more clothe you—you of little faith?
stand up
Simon himself believed and was baptized. And he followed Philip everywhere, astonished by the great signs and miracles he saw.
The woman is carrying her water pole on her shoulder.
[As for] inagkud, corn and rice are mixed together which will become agkud.
tight
Now to the unmarried and the widows I say: It is good for them to stay unmarried, as I do.
will fail to receive a hundred times as much in this present age (homes, brothers, sisters, mothers, children and fields--and with them, persecutions) and in the age to come, eternal life.
be discouraged
He had to turn around and go back.
much
but it has now been revealed through the appearing of our Savior, Christ Jesus, who has destroyed death and has brought life and immortality to light through the gospel.
To sneeze
The space under a house.
When the Pharisees saw this, they asked his disciples, “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
If you throw away trash, you take it to the receptacle.
This person is just being argumentative whose argument is not correct.
Again Jesus called the crowd to him and said, "Listen to me, everyone, and understand this.
In the center, around the throne, were four living creatures, and they were covered with eyes, in front and in back. The first living creature was like a lion, the second was like an ox, the third had a face like a man, the fourth was like a flying eagle.
Anyone who welcomes you welcomes me, and anyone who welcomes me welcomes the one who sent me.
When she had not yet been freed from the charm, she loved her husband and she was very happy.
put
When the ubun-ubun dove calls it says, “bagu-bù, huun, huun, huun.”
where the chief priests and the Jewish leaders appeared before him and presented the charges against Paul.
I dumped out the corn; it was no good.
While the man held on to Peter and John, all the people were astonished and came running to them in the place called Solomon’s Colonnade.
For the Son of Man came to seek and to save what was lost."
To give life (provide sustenance)
To inadvertently bump or clink something together so they make a clinking or clanging sound
When they came to Jesus, they pleaded earnestly with him, “This man deserves to have you do this,
Those tending the pigs ran off, went into the town and reported all this, including what had happened to the demon-possessed men.
What we are looking at has become blurry; we cannot see the writing clearly.
When a person becomes old, they become shriveled because they become bent over and feeble.
A hat
They said to him, "John's disciples often fast and pray, and so do the disciples of the Pharisees, but yours go on eating and drinking."
(This Mary, whose brother Lazarus now lay sick, was the same one who poured perfume on the Lord and wiped his feet with her hair.)
Doubtful
Not only so, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for our adoption to sonship, the redemption of our bodies.
chopped
Wrinkled (as of clothing)
be dammed up
For the one who was a slave when called to faith in the Lord is the Lord’s freed person; similarly, the one who was free when called is Christ’s slave.
Indeed there are those who are last who will be first, and first who will be last."
You made them a little lower than the angels; you crowned them with glory and honor
But it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment than for you.
They kept looking for Jesus, and as they stood in the temple area they asked one another, "What do you think? Isn't he coming to the Feast at all?"
constantly
hole, ditch
The spiritual man makes judgments about all things, but he himself is not subject to any man's judgment:
There in Maambago there were those who were caused to plant corn.
Then I heard what sounded like a voice among the four living creatures, saying, “Two pounds of wheat for a day’s wages, and six pounds of barley for a day’s wages, and do not damage the oil and the wine!”
groin
The person who doesn't have a uvula, he is unable to speak clearly and is like a mute.
Jesus, once more deeply moved, came to the tomb. It was a cave with a stone laid across the entrance.
Oh, how strong was this crocodile
Their conduct is in accord.
OK go ahead
When we make a deposit on something, we give a piece of material as a deposit to reserve a piglet.
Yet I hold this against you: You have forsaken the love you had at first.
The chicken will go into a state of withdrawal when it becaomes lulled.
He commanded his sister, “Come here.”
He looked around at them all, and then said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” He did so, and his hand was completely restored.
The monkey will steal the key.
If the mother is still at the house, [the term is] not yet iggalat leaving her child behind with someone but it is correct to have the child watched over by the older sibling because the mother will do laundry. She is near the house and will hear the child if he/she crys.
Then, leaving her water jar, the woman went back to the town and said to the people,
While Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest came by.
A reddish-brown and orange chicken with long feet
“Are you still so dull?” Jesus asked them.  Don’t you see that whatever enters the mouth goes into the stomach and then out of the body?
Cowardly.
to be suitable
We sing a lulluby to the child
speak clearly and directly
The person who is uninhibited/unrestrained, we refer to as [one] who has no manners.
Lame
For just as each of us has one body with many members, and these members do not all have the same function,
me
Paul stayed on in Corinth for some time. Then he left the brothers and sisters and sailed for Syria, accompanied by Priscilla and Aquila. Before he sailed, he had his hair cut off at Cenchreae because of a vow he had taken.
The only suffering which you can be ignored is that which takes one by surprise because it seems there is a difference between that which is ignored and that which is endured
landslide
make fierce
But among you there must not be even a hint of sexual immorality, or of any kind of impurity, or of greed, because these are improper for God’s holy people.
But we do see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, now crowned with glory and honor because he suffered death, so that by the grace of God he might taste death for everyone.
But if we judged ourselves, we would not come under judgment.
To be too full, to have overeaten so as to be uncomfortable
The mature?? iguana, is the same as a kuglung instrument.
To all in Rome who are loved by God and called to be his holy people: Grace and peace to you from God our Father and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
You be the ones [to discuss it] with her first.
In the same way, faith by itself, if it is not accompanied by action, is dead.
and when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.
different
A place to rest.
When we look in a mirror, we see our reflection.
Person deprived of companion; alone
cry
to be out of breath, breathless
and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven, by making peace through his blood, shed on the cross.
A bus has a side, a multicab and a “jeep”
When they had finished eating, Jesus said to Simon Peter, “Simon son of John, do you love me more than these?” “Yes, Lord,” he said, “you know that I love you.” Jesus said, “Feed my lambs.”
In our place, it is necessary that we be well-behaved so that we won't be discredited.
Taganay has gotten fat.
After this, Jesus traveled about from one town and village to another, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of God. The Twelve were with him,
“just as the Father knows me and I know the Father—and I lay down my life for the sheep.”
He gave me the calf of the carabao.
meaning sense
As they were untying the colt, its owners asked them, "Why are you untying the colt?"
toilet
alternate legs or arms when walking
The male [rodent] was lacking [food] to eat because the female was greedy.
To make a rhythmic noise with the pestle
You know that everyone in the province of Asia has deserted me, including Phygelus and Hermogenes.
Then the angel said to him, “Put on your clothes and sandals.” And Peter did so. “Wrap your cloak around you and follow me,” the angel told him.
Has no one returned to give praise to God except this foreigner?”
and put everything under his feet.? In putting everything under him, God left nothing that is not subject to him. Yet at present we do not see everything subject to him.
In the same way, the Lord has commanded that those who preach the gospel should receive their living from the gospel.
Jesus looked at them and said, “With man this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”
Clarify it.
bring along
signify
but the world must learn that I love the Father and that I do exactly what my Father has commanded me. "Come now; let us leave.
To be passed down, as some characteristic or authority which is recognized in someone's descendant.
pat
Part of certain traps released by the trigger.
clear throat
Jesus replied, “To be sure, Elijah comes and will restore all things.
take something
But with loud shouts they insistently demanded that he be crucified, and their shouts prevailed.
Nevertheless, death reigned from the time of Adam to the time of Moses, even over those who did not sin by breaking a command, as did Adam, who is a pattern of the one to come.
You blind men! Which is greater: the gift, or the altar that makes the gift sacred?
hey didn't join [the fields] by cutting
Let us hold unswervingly to the hope we profess, for he who promised is faithful.
I do not set aside the grace of God, for if righteousness could be gained through the law, Christ died for nothing!"
Imitate
For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. Live as children of light
I know that when I come to you, I will come in the full measure of the blessing of Christ.
saying: “We give thanks to you, Lord God Almighty, the One who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and have begun to reign.
The armed men are very many who attack their enemies.
“The man runs away because he is a hired hand and cares nothing for the sheep.”
corn field
To be ambushed
Succumb
Jesus replied, "No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for service in the kingdom of God."
Kind of small bird
I looked, and there before me was a white cloud, and seated on the cloud was one like a son of man with a crown of gold on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
painful urination.
hair (poetic term)
He said, "This is the blood of the covenant, which God has commanded you to keep."
When he had placed his hands on them, he went on from there.
May the Lord direct your hearts into God’s love and Christ’s perseverance.
abrade
For no one can lay any foundation other than the one already laid, which is Jesus Christ.
Then Peter invited the men into the house to be his guests. The next day Peter started out with them, and some of the believers from Joppa went along.
The chief priests accused him of many things. So again Pilate asked him, "Aren't you going to answer? See how many things they are accusing you of."
Turn up the volume (lit. operation of) the radio.
Our ancestors worshiped on this mountain, but you Jews claim that the place where we must worship is in Jerusalem.”
‘No, father Abraham,’ he said, ‘but if someone from the dead goes to them, they will repent.’
if it is serving, then serve; if it is teaching, then teach;
And he said to them, "I tell you the truth, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the kingdom of God come with power."
for the sun stopped shining. And the curtain of the temple was torn in two.
Even in the case of lifeless things that make sounds, such as the pipe or harp, how will anyone know what tune is being played unless there is a distinction in the notes?
deny
Alexander the metalworker did me a great deal of harm. The Lord will repay him for what he has done.
provoked
Peter went down and said to the men, “I’m the one you’re looking for. Why have you come?”
set dogs on a trail
To watch over, take care of, protect
To harvest
And again they shouted: “Hallelujah! The smoke from her goes up for ever and ever.”
small hairs
center of
having a form of godliness but denying its power. Have nothing to do with such people.
Jesus answered: “Watch out that no one deceives you.
Paul gathered a pile of brushwood and, as he put it on the fire, a viper, driven out by the heat, fastened itself on his hand.
The person who laughs without showing his teeth keeps his mouth closed when he laughs. Just some people do that.
In your own Law it is written that the testimony of two men is valid.
Fearing that we would be dashed against the rocks, they dropped four anchors from the stern and prayed for daylight.
He keeps coming back until he can obtain that which he is requesting. It is as though the person from whom he is begging is being forced to give.
He sent another servant, but that one also they beat and treated shamefully and sent away empty-handed.
scissors; to cut with scissors
“Blessed are those whose transgressions are forgiven, whose sins are covered.
Good, a good situation; blessing
I have great confidence in you; I take great pride in you. I am greatly encouraged; in all our troubles my joy knows no bounds.
Therefore do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Each day has enough trouble of its own.
pray or sacrific
proclaim; brag; boast; show off
Shaft of a spear
Transparent
To leave something behind for someone, such as food for a child
If [you] feel unsafe, leave together now for Maambao because it is a time to be alert for raiders for a while.
You see that his faith and his actions were working together, and his faith was made complete by what he did.
If a woman does not cover her head, she should have her hair cut off; and if it is a disgrace for a woman to have her hair cut or shaved off, she should cover her head.
Fellow Israelites, I can tell you confidently that the patriarch David died and was buried, and his tomb is here to this day.   But he was a prophet and knew that God had promised him on oath that he would place one of his descendants on his throne.  Seeing what was to come, he spoke of the resurrection of the Messiah, that he was not abandoned to the realm of the dead, nor did his body see decay.
Come across, encounter.
He consented, and watched for an opportunity to hand Jesus over to them when no crowd was present.
If the creatures become silent, they simultaneously stop making a noise.
And why do you worry about clothes? See how the flowers of the field grow. They do not labor or spin.
A fetish (for harvesting rice); to tie together.
For the time will come when you will say, 'Blessed are the barren women, the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed!'
Then he returned to the disciples and said to them, “Are you still sleeping and resting? Look, the hour has come, and the Son of Man is delivered into the hands of sinners.
shake grains
Cover over; fill in a hole
We may get poked
I saw heaven standing open and there before me was a white horse, whose rider is called Faithful and True. With justice he judges and wages war.
‘I will not,’ he answered, but later he changed his mind and went.
The law was brought in so that the trespass might increase. But where sin increased, grace increased all the more,
Why then didn't you put my money on deposit, so that when I came back, I could have collected it with interest?'
The woman removed her laundry when she collected it.
to be the right fit or size
At that very time Jesus cured many who had diseases, sicknesses and evil spirits, and gave sight to many who were blind.
“Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother’s eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye?
shiny, sleek, smooth
laundry
I was looking forward to the plane’s landing.
and not only for that nation but also for the scattered children of God, to bring them together and make them one.
I’ll get lonely if they’re slow in returning.
Black and white striped wild mongoose.
“As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you. Now remain in my love.”
To extend
On hearing it, many of his disciples said, "This is a hard teaching. Who can accept it?"
have someone perm their hair
If there is no dam (lit dam of water), it is not possible to make rice paddies.
To savor
So then, just as you received Christ Jesus as Lord, continue to live your lives in him,
The men were amazed and asked, “What kind of man is this? Even the winds and the waves obey him!”
joke
kind of black rice
As for a person who is able to do a miracle, he has power to do something amazing.
Yet to all who did receive him, to those who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God—
When he arrived in Galilee, the Galileans welcomed him. They had seen all that he had done in Jerusalem at the Passover Festival, for they also had been there.
They serve at a sanctuary that is a copy and shadow of what is in heaven. This is why Moses was warned when he was about to build the tabernacle: "See to it that you make everything according to the pattern shown you on the mountain."
When they saw him, they worshiped him; but some doubted.
But I tell you that everyone will have to give account on the day of judgment for every empty word they have spoken.
help
wooden hoe-like instrument
Great crowds came to him, bringing the lame, the blind, the crippled, the mute and many others, and laid them at his feet; and he healed them.
David calls him 'Lord.' How then can he be his son?"
Why did you break/snap the rope/rattan by which my raft was attached to the shore?
use something with which to pick up something else
Philip, like Andrew and Peter, was from the town of Bethsaida.
The sun has one kind of splendor, the moon another and the stars another; and star differs from star in splendor.
Between
All that the Father gives me will come to me, and whoever comes to me I will never drive away.
Very rarely will anyone die for a righteous person, though for a good person someone might possibly dare to die.
Cornelius stared at him in fear. “What is it, Lord?” he asked. The angel answered, “Your prayers and gifts to the poor have come up as a memorial offering before God.
Jesus, knowing their thoughts, took a little child and had him stand beside him.
"Just what I have been claiming all along," Jesus replied. "I have much to say in judgment of you. But he who sent me is reliable, and what I have heard from him I tell the world."
“Bring them here to me,” he said.
To castrate.
The number of the men who had eaten was five thousand.
Therefore, since we are receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us be thankful, and so worship God acceptably with reverence and awe,
Two days ago she fell through.
The cat leans back and tumbles when it plays with another cat.
give money or clothing on credit to someone who probably won’t pay for it.
small dark lizard
count.
As for the body of that pula palm, we will knotch it to cultivate grubs.
angry.
In the same way, after supper he took the cup, saying, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood; do this, whenever you drink it, in remembrance of me."
enough
Any kind of  shrimp or crayfish.
Filth (especially dirt sticking to sweat)
Then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the palace of the high priest, whose name was Caiaphas,
Parent-in-law or in-law relatives
We’ll get slashed.
To run in different directions as boys do when playing basketball
Any fruit or vegetable blossom.
"He replied, 'I tell you that to everyone who has, more will be given, but as for the one who has nothing, even what he has will be taken away.
speak or act inappropriately and/or disrespectfully.
“They will do such things because they have not known the Father or me.”
narrow, rushing stream of water
To tell
It is not surprising, then, if his servants masquerade as servants of righteousness. Their end will be what their actions deserve.
shoot with bow and arrow.
It was the same in the days of Lot. People were eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting and building.
According to the Lord's own word, we tell you that we who are still alive, who are left till the coming of the Lord, will certainly not precede those who have fallen asleep.
Slide the comb between the shingles
Type of edible shell fish which adheres to rocks or wood.
weak
They replied, "Let one of us sit at your right and the other at your left in your glory."
unhelpful
So don’t be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows.
When the mother of a child goes to weed her field, she leaves her child in the care of someone else and that person watches over him/her.
lizard or iguana with yellow throat
That's why we will increase [the amount of] my money so that it will be enough to arrive at Maambago.
See that no one is sexually immoral, or is godless like Esau, who for a single meal sold his inheritance rights as the oldest son.
The days will come upon you when your enemies will build an embankment against you and encircle you and hem you in on every side.
Again Jesus said, "Peace be with you! As the Father has sent me, I am sending you."
Not until halfway through the Feast did Jesus go up to the temple courts and begin to teach.
scratch an itch
Now I say to the rest of you in Thyatira, to you who do not hold to her teaching and have not learned Satan’s so-called deep secrets, ‘I will not impose any other burden on you,
For this is the reason the gospel was preached even to those who are now dead, so that they might be judged according to human standards in regard to the body, but live according to God in regard to the spirit.
And you also must testify, for you have been with me from the beginning.
The woodsy area between a village and the river.
To be very thin
To roost as chickens
A woman’s cloth bag worn on the back
We went on ahead to the ship and sailed for Assos, where we were going to take Paul aboard. He had made this arrangement because he was going there on foot.
My dear brothers, take note of this: Everyone should be quick to listen, slow to speak and slow to become angry,
Yesterday is the day which has just passed.
In addition, some of our women amazed us. They went to the tomb early this morning
Keep watch over yourselves and all the flock of which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers. Be shepherds of the church of God, which he bought with his own blood.
begin a speech or discussion.
kind of cicada
If the corn flowers wilt, it is a sign that the corn is being blighted.
The people whose languages became different, they were not being able to comprehend each other. They didn’t understand each other.
Now to each one the manifestation of the Spirit is given for the common good.
"Not long after that, the younger son got together all he had, set off for a distant country and there squandered his wealth in wild living.
If two siblings have spouses, they call each other iras.
Monday
And Adam was not the one deceived; it was the woman who was deceived and became a sinner.
But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles. He told them how Saul on his journey had seen the Lord and that the Lord had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had preached fearlessly in the name of Jesus.
Set your minds on things above, not on earthly things.
That bulanbulan plant, its glow is very bright.
Whatever happens, conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ. Then, whether I come and see you or only hear about you in my absence, I will know that you stand firm in one spirit, contending as one man for the faith of the gospel
Writhe.
arrange neatly
You will be told when [the grains] have filled out.
Go ahead, then, and complete what your ancestors started!
Possibly
Follower of a chief.
field full of sugarcane in full growth
frustrated
They left and found things just as Jesus had told them. So they prepared the Passover.
Perhaps I will stay with you for a while, or even spend the winter, so that you can help me on my journey, wherever I go.
The corn is becoming completely lumpy
Therefore Jesus told them, "My time is not yet here; for you any time will do.
Blossom
make holes in something
recognize
Send to Joppa for Simon who is called Peter. He is a guest in the home of Simon the tanner, who lives by the sea.’
Jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of the boy, and he was healed at that moment.
Not fitting
and throw them into the blazing furnace, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
a perch for a bird or chicken
another
relative.
Stick the knife into the stump.
A flower which is closed has not yet opened.
To pull back and inside, as head of a turtle.
There are blotches on the [body of a] child when he/she is two weeks old from the time of birth . [They] develop from his/her milk. The blotches just go away when he is older
and asked him for letters to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he found any there who belonged to the Way, whether men or women, he might take them as prisoners to Jerusalem.
Cebu is an island because its edge is all water.
They came to a place called Golgotha (which means “the place of the skull”).
The day which will arrive, that is tomorrow.
After his suffering, he presented himself to them and gave many convincing proofs that he was alive. He appeared to them over a period of forty days and spoke about the kingdom of God.
elope
When we dry corn in the sun, it will shrink because it is green.
And I'll say to myself, "You have plenty of good things laid up for many years. Take life easy; eat, drink and be merry."
“Therefore, my friends, I want you to know that through Jesus the forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you.
And Saul approved of their killing him. On that day a great persecution broke out against the church in Jerusalem, and all except the apostles were scattered throughout Judea and Samaria.  Godly men buried Stephen and mourned deeply for him.
cross a river
Wall, as of a house or building.
The sun is shining in our eyes.
Hide a fault
The evil spirits will devour you.
Jesus said, "For judgment I have come into this world, so that the blind will see and those who see will become blind."
The wife does not have authority over her own body but yields it to her husband. In the same way, the husband does not have authority over his own body but yields it to his wife.
arrive at an agreement.
moan inarticulately
The wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them were the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
Perhaps this is your size
Now if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him.
warning call of the omen dove
As for a person who has a good place to cut a field, he will mark it so that no one else (lit no person) will cut it.
But even if we or an angel from heaven should preach a gospel other than the one we preached to you, let them be under God’s curse!
in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
hop with both feet (as a bird, rabbit, or chicken)
Why are you staring? Do you expect to snap off a wart?
That
“Very truly I tell you, whoever believes in me will do the works I have been doing, and they will do even greater things than these, because I am going to the Father.”
It is being unfolded.
Then he went down to Capernaum, a town in Galilee, and on the Sabbath he taught the people.
Two rebels were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left.
When we finish eating and stack the dishes, we clear the table of dishes and food.
let us draw near to God with a sincere heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled to cleanse us from a guilty conscience and having our bodies washed with pure water.
to faint or take a nap
supper
The ashes will become dust if they blow/are carried by the wind.
They took Jesus to the high priest, and all the chief priests, elders and teachers of the law came together.
When you happen to encounter the gamowgamow spirit, the reason for your illness is because you become tangled up in her long hair.
crab
kind of bony, transparent fish
misfortune, as losing all children
follow the very same path as another
o make a gurgling or rumbling sound
Older-younger sibling relationship
Bugs can’t get into it
Thin flakes, as of skin, or from eyes
The lovers are moving close to each other.
Woven mat for sleeping or drying grains
Others, like seed sown on good soil, hear the word, accept it, and produce a crop--thirty, sixty or even a hundred times what was sown."
A kind of nightbird
Then the father went to the other son and said the same thing. He answered, ‘I will, sir,’ but he did not go.
It’s a improbable that we will obtain horses since we’re women.
For as woman came from man, so also man is born of woman. But everything comes from God.
To bridle horse.
Pick up the pangi seeds because we will soak out the poisonous sap.
His neighbors and those who had formerly seen him begging asked, “Isn’t this the same man who used to sit and beg?”
Likewise, Asat is also relentlessly pursuing [the possibility of] going home ahead [of someone else].
and that he appeared to Cephas, and then to the Twelve.
Yet Saul grew more and more powerful and baffled the Jews living in Damascus by proving that Jesus is the Messiah.
For as in Adam all die, so in Christ all will be made alive.
If rattan is used to sstring (lit. attach by sticking [with a needle]) the beads, it will easily (lit. quickly) break if it gets wet with water.
just enough left
This was the second sign Jesus performed after coming from Judea to Galilee.
After I go through Macedonia, I will come to you—for I will be going through Macedonia.
So the Twelve gathered all the disciples together and said, “It would not be right for us to neglect the ministry of the word of God in order to wait on tables.
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, in keeping with the promise of life that is in Christ Jesus,
sew
No one who denies the Son has the Father; whoever acknowledges the Son has the Father also.
To address
Name of a village on the upper Liboganon river between Banualoy and Langilan.
Many will come in my name, claiming, 'I am he,' and will deceive many.
ahead of time
As for the shoulders, its extentions are the upper arms and the arms.
I tell you, not one of those men who were invited will get a taste of my banquet.' "
So then he told them plainly, “Lazarus is dead.”
tears
Camotes that won’t root but just creep all over.
From then on, Pilate tried to set Jesus free, but the Jewish leaders kept shouting, “If you let this man go, you are no friend of Caesar. Anyone who claims to be a king opposes Caesar.”
Then Christ would have had to suffer many times since the creation of the world. But now he has appeared once for all at the end of the ages to do away with sin by the sacrifice of himself.
He has a resemblance to pogul wood because he's lazy.
To plant by sticking plants upright (bananas or taro)
This mystery is that through the gospel the Gentiles are heirs together with Israel, members together of one body, and sharers together in the promise in Christ Jesus.
Hawk or hawk-eagle
What did they cook
Now there were some present at that time who told Jesus about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
Stop judging by mere appearances, and make a right judgment."
In that hour Jesus said to the crowd, “Am I leading a rebellion, that you have come out with swords and clubs to capture me? Every day I sat in the temple courts teaching, and you did not arrest me.
Peter went with them, and when he arrived he was taken upstairs to the room. All the widows stood around him, crying and showing him the robes and other clothing that Dorcas had made while she was still with them.
The Son of Man will go as it has been decreed, but woe to that man who betrays him."
They brought the donkey and the colt and placed their cloaks on them for Jesus to sit on.
Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.
But now that you know God—or rather are known by God—how is it that you are turning back to those weak and miserable forces? Do you wish to be enslaved by them all over again?
Amasig has a cough.
If someone desires to get married, he will pursue it. He will continuously discuss it with the father [of the girl] until he agrees.
For if someone comes to you and preaches a Jesus other than the Jesus we preached, or if you receive a different spirit from the one you received, or a different gospel from the one you accepted, you put up with it easily enough.
although in fact it was not Jesus who baptized, but his disciples.
Estimate.
finished
What could I have done in that [I am] just a woman and so it's hard for me to give life/sustenance to our children who are still small.
men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Aware of this, Jesus said to them, “Why are you bothering this woman? She has done a beautiful thing to me.
When God raised up his servant, he sent him first to you to bless you by turning each of you from your wicked ways.”
From noon until three in the afternoon darkness came over all the land.
As he approached Jerusalem and saw the city, he wept over it
Infrequently, seldom, rarely
to smother
Then Thomas (also known as Didymus) said to the rest of the disciples, “Let us also go, that we may die with him.”
one's stomach to feel uncomfortable
He listened to Paul as he was speaking. Paul looked directly at him, saw that he had faith to be healed
Blessed is she who has believed that the Lord would fulfill his promises to her!”
“If you really know me, you will know my Father as well. From now on, you do know him and have seen him.”
As for that relentless pursuing, an unmarried man keeps coming back until he can obtain that which he is requesting. It is like the person from whom he is begging is being forced to give.
infected sore
He of whom these things are said belonged to a different tribe, and no one from that tribe has ever served at the altar. For it is clear that our Lord descended from Judah, and in regard to that tribe Moses said nothing about priests.
A very short person is a dwarf.
universe
inlet
“You aren’t one of this man’s disciples too, are you?” she asked Peter. He replied, “I am not.”
Now there were seven brothers. The first one married and died without leaving any children.
Blind
So we urged Titus, just as he had earlier made a beginning, to bring also to completion this act of grace on your part.
Once more he visited Cana in Galilee, where he had turned the water into wine. And there was a certain royal official whose son lay sick at Capernaum.
to pry off, up, out
female pig or piglet
Consider him who endured such opposition from sinners, so that you will not grow weary and lose heart.
After arresting him, he put him in prison, handing him over to be guarded by four squads of four soldiers each. Herod intended to bring him out for public trial after the Passover.
When I was on the beach, I was caught by the wind of a strong whirlwind. Dried out plants on the beach were pulled up by the roots and whirled around as the were carried upwards.
Cough
saying: “Amen! Praise and glory and wisdom and thanks and honor and power and strength be to our God for ever and ever. Amen!”
Because of the increase of wickedness, the love of most will grow cold,
neighbor
eversince
Let’s eat now.
Let's build a beautiful house.
For there are three that testify:
If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off. It is better for you to enter life maimed than with two hands to go into hell, where the fire never goes out. where " 'their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.'
They were felling trees today.
Even so, when you see these things happening, you know that it is near, right at the door.
We did not give in to them for a moment, so that the truth of the gospel might be preserved for you.
“Praise be to the Lord, the God of Israel, because he has come to his people and redeemed them.
A river tributary of the Langilan.
“You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall not commit adultery.’
And he is the head of the body, the church; he is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead, so that in everything he might have the supremacy.
The wrath of God is being revealed from heaven against all the godlessness and wickedness of people, who suppress the truth by their wickedness,
Tip out; pour or dump
So when you see standing in the holy place ‘the abomination that causes desolation,’ spoken of through the prophet Daniel—let the reader understand—
Then the disciples came to Jesus in private and asked, “Why couldn’t we drive it out?”
As for the kisulà plant, its body is like upu and its fruit is long and grooved.
We offend by our smell
Blessed are you when people hate you, when they exclude you and insult you and reject your name as evil, because of the Son of Man.
Strap
A person who is cleaning under the house pushes aside the debris.
He’s always laughing because he has no companions.
“I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision. I saw something like a large sheet being let down from heaven by its four corners, and it came down to where I was.
large aquatic turtle
A kind of leaf that grows from the ground
become slim
In him was life, and that life was the light of all mankind.
they are senseless, faithless, heartless, ruthless.
Indeed, the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Don't be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows.
to go down to the sea
Were they born just a month ago?
If someone [loses a loved one] by death, we comfort them by our bearing of the hurt of his/her emotional pain
test
‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’? He is not the God of the dead but of the living.”
On hearing this, Jesus said, “It is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick.
He would answer, "This is the news which I have to tell about our place."
curved weeding tool similar to a sythe
Then Jesus said to them, "Give to Caesar what is Caesar's and to God what is God's." And they were amazed at him.
The domestic pig will be killed and eaten when it’s old and weak.
This is love for God: to obey his commands. And his commands are not burdensome,
A reddish color nocturnal animal similar to a sloth
We hunger for fish and meat when we harvest.
And he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, because the Spirit intercedes for God’s people in accordance with the will of God.
I saw the notebook which was here on top of the table.
When some of those standing there heard this, they said, “He’s calling Elijah.”
Avoid every kind of evil.
A dog when it gives birth, puppy is the name of its offspring.
For everyone looks out for his own interests, not those of Jesus Christ.
receive money for work
discharge from infected eyes
The nose of the pig was flattened because it had bumped into a root.
type of sword or knife
In his name the nations will put their hope.”
But the seed on good soil stands for those with a noble and good heart, who hear the word, retain it, and by persevering produce a crop.
Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied about these men: "See, the Lord is coming with thousands upon thousands of his holy ones
So they decided to use the money to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for foreigners.
Mussed up (as of hair)
Slow.
it doesn't burn if there is a field with many pogul trees.
So Paul and Barnabas spent considerable time there, speaking boldly for the Lord, who confirmed the message of his grace by enabling them to perform signs and wonders.
We recovered from our fear of the raiders.
Here is a trustworthy saying: Whoever aspires to be an overseer desires a noble task.
If one builds a house, he begins to make it.
I needed clothes and you clothed me, I was sick and you looked after me, I was in prison and you came to visit me.’
grimace or grin, as a baby monkey when frightened
Aware of this, Jesus withdrew from that place. A large crowd followed him, and he healed all who were ill.
There was someone who cast a knife at his companion but it just happened to lodge in the wall.
The children are chewing|and sucking on on the sugarcane.
While they were stoning him, Stephen prayed, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.”
A grown pig.
That’s not a lie.
He told them, ‘You also go and work in my vineyard, and I will pay you whatever is right.’
They were very sad and began to say to him one after the other, “Surely you don’t mean me, Lord?”
and give relief to you who are troubled, and to us as well. This will happen when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven in blazing fire with his powerful angels.
For by him all things were created: things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; all things were created by him and for him.
Now we know that if the earthly tent we live in is destroyed, we have a building from God, an eternal house in heaven, not built by human hands.
“And I will do whatever you ask in my name, so that the Father may be glorified in the Son.”
Long-sleeved
and he was in the desert forty days, being tempted by Satan. He was with the wild animals, and angels attended him.
Once when Zechariah’s division was on duty and he was serving as priest before God,  he was chosen by lot, according to the custom of the priesthood, to go into the temple of the Lord and burn incense.
Joseph took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
Younger (adjective)
to hold on the lap
Dam
similar to lawa-an
Sift the flour.
May the God of peace, who through the blood of the eternal covenant brought back from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep,
The beginning of the gospel about Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
sharp stakes
enter, go into; break out (as in a rash)
You must teach what is in accord with sound doctrine.
bring people together
A kind of rattan
yet because this widow keeps bothering me, I will see that she gets justice, so that she won’t eventually come and attack me!’”
How were you inferior to the other churches, except that I was never a burden to you? Forgive me this wrong!
knead, as bread
It was Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and the others with them who told this to the apostles.
Once you were alienated from God and were enemies in your minds because of your evil behavior.
When we harvest a leaf of the alik-ik plant, [we get] just one piece.
stomp
locate; be near something
Jesus said, "My kingdom is not of this world. If it were, my servants would fight to prevent my arrest by the Jews. But now my kingdom is from another place."
accumulate
Andrew, Philip, Bartholomew, Matthew, Thomas, James son of Alphaeus, Thaddaeus, Simon the Zealot
but whoever drinks the water I give them will never thirst. Indeed, the water I give them will become in them a spring of water welling up to eternal life.”
climb
"His master answered, 'You take charge of five cities.'
We will pick just one chupa of ripened red pepper fruits.
He dealt treacherously with our people and oppressed our ancestors by forcing them to throw out their newborn babies so that they would die.
Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask him.
They are beside themselves with anxiety about the raiders.
father
I pray that you may be active in sharing your faith, so that you will have a full understanding of every good thing we have in Christ.
Then the high priest stood up and said to Jesus, “Are you not going to answer? What is this testimony that these men are bringing against you?”
Then Jesus said to his disciples, “Truly I tell you, it is hard for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of heaven.
Horns or antlers
Therefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices; my body also will rest in hope,
For this reason they could not believe, because, as Isaiah says elsewhere:
“Watch and pray so that you will not fall into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
To Timothy, my dear son: Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
If anyone else thinks he has reasons to put confidence in the flesh, I have more: circumcised on the eighth day, of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; in regard to the law, a Pharisee;
For one's head to be off center or leaning to one side
We are ten people who will reciprocally help one another to cut fields.
May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all.
While Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews of Corinth made a united attack on Paul and brought him to the place of judgment.
swim doggy paddle
Look down
The people placed their things in a bedbasket with a lid. It won't deteriorate if it is covered with the sticky sap of a tabun fruit.
And God permitting, we will do so.
A bird similar to purple martin
For God has bound all men over to disobedience so that he may have mercy on them all.
But there are some Jews from the province of Asia, who ought to be here before you and bring charges if they have anything against me.
an idol
Such teachings come through hypocritical liars, whose consciences have been seared as with a hot iron.
We’ll be burned by the steam.
We’re cutting our fields now.
(as it is written in the Law of the Lord, “Every firstborn male is to be consecrated to the Lord”),
Any meat or fish that can be eaten; to go fishing; to catch edible water creatures.
The apostles gathered around Jesus and reported to him all they had done and taught.
to dangle
But understand this: If the owner of the house had known at what time of night the thief was coming, he would have kept watch and would not have let his house be broken into.
shiny
When one takes leave, they let someone know that they are going now.
Then I heard every creature in heaven and on earth and under the earth and on the sea, and all that is in them, singing: "To him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb be praise and honor and glory and power, for ever and ever!"
If there are a lot of dirty spider webs, we brush them off with a broom so that they will be removed.
So from that day on they plotted to take his life.
To kneel.
And in fact, you do love all the brothers throughout Macedonia. Yet we urge you, brothers, to do so more and more
“But do not think I will accuse you before the Father. Your accuser is Moses, on whom your hopes are set.
The Lord answered, "Who then is the faithful and wise manager, whom the master puts in charge of his servants to give them their food allowance at the proper time?
When they finished, James spoke up. “Brothers,” he said, “listen to me.
immediately
“Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them.
If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear."
twist.
To screech.
You, therefore, have no excuse, you who pass judgment on someone else, for at whatever point you judge another, you are condemning yourself, because you who pass judgment do the same things.  Now we know that God’s judgment against those who do such things is based on truth.
go down
wise
What I said to the girl was, "Let's go away for a period of time to test our feelings. We will make an agreement for one year or two years, and if your love doesn't transfer to another man, I will follow through to marry you."
nudge
they urgently pleaded with us for the privilege of sharing in this service to the Lord’s people.
The person whose legs are crippled, scoots forward as he moves about.
Wherever the middle of the earth is, that is the center.
When the river floods, it rains for one night and then the entire riverbed is underwater.
In the same way, good deeds are obvious, and even those that are not obvious cannot remain hidden forever.
The punishment inflicted on him by the majority is sufficient.
For we know him who said, "It is mine to avenge; I will repay," and again, "The Lord will judge his people."
To feel better; have feeling of sadness or worry lifted.
He went on to tell the people this parable: "A man planted a vineyard, rented it to some farmers and went away for a long time
measure each other
But make up your mind not to worry beforehand how you will defend yourselves.
When we place something over the fire, we expose it to the heat of the fire so that it can be used for wrapping food.
pangi fruit carried by a river current
to tear
here is an outer layer on top of the kernel of corn which is similar to plastic. It is called a "hull'
You blind fools! Which is greater: the gold, or the temple that makes the gold sacred?
any number of items
His followers mocked him so they were changed into trees.
Scrutinize
Therefore do not let anyone judge you by what you eat or drink, or with regard to a religious festival, a New Moon celebration or a Sabbath day.
Then Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, went to the chief priests to betray Jesus to them.
turn around
Peter answered him, “We have left everything to follow you! What then will there be for us?”
And he performed great and miraculous signs, even causing fire to come down from heaven to earth in full view of men.
Eyebrow
From one man he made every nation of men, that they should inhabit the whole earth; and he determined the times set for them and the exact places where they should live.
Solitary thing (like a lone word in a language)
To lift and move by leverage, that is the beginning of turning [the log]. It is lifted and moved by leverage so it will roll.
We help a weak person by holding he hand so that he will gain the ability to walk so that he will be able to become ambulatory.
The child who is mute, from the time he is born until he is old already he/sh is mute and will be unable to speak.
On no day will its gates ever be shut, for there will be no night there.
necklace
A housepost, if it is rotten, we cut it off straight across because we need to remove the rotten part. That is the reason for cutting it off straight across so that it will be straight.
Jesus replied, “You do not realize now what I am doing, but later you will understand.”
Now Jesus learned that the Pharisees had heard that he was gaining and baptizing more disciples than John—
line up
Have you understood all these things?” Jesus asked. “Yes,” they replied.
example
debt
While Jesus was having dinner at Levi's house, many tax collectors and "sinners" were eating with him and his disciples, for there were many who followed him.
God made him who had no sin to be sin for us, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.
A chicken egg which is underdeveloped won't hatch because it has not matured.
God has raised this Jesus to life, and we are all witnesses of it.
But in the account of the bush, even Moses showed that the dead rise, for he calls the Lord 'the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.'
When Jesus got out of the boat, a man with an evil spirit came from the tombs to meet him.
But you say that if anyone declares that what might have been used to help their father or mother is ‘devoted to God,’
The meaning is jumbled when there are words which don't fit.
He told the crowd to sit down on the ground. When he had taken the seven loaves and given thanks, he broke them and gave them to his disciples to set before the people, and they did so.
Long, fancy spear with metal decorations
Remember those earlier days after you had received the light, when you stood your ground in a great contest in the face of suffering.
This, then, is how you should pray: “Our Father in heaven, hallowed be your name,
(Unclear entry - possibly incomplete)
As for you, you were dead in your transgressions and sins,
Bohemian waxwing bird (with feathered headdress)
The rice was spilled and scattered from the basket; it was spilled and then scattered on the ground.
The library was what impeded [the flow of] the flooding river
The burrows of the marmots mound are connected underneath to the places where they make their nests.
through glory and dishonor, bad report and good report; genuine, yet regarded as impostors;
Hair barrette
I still had no peace of mind, because I did not find my brother Titus there. So I said goodbye to them and went on to Macedonia.
?
language
Heaven and earth adjacent to each other.
“I have given them your word and the world has hated them, for they are not of the world any more than I am of the world.”
To playfully threaten to hit someone
“But the man who was mistreating the other pushed Moses aside and said, ‘Who made you ruler and judge over us?
by
Jacob’s well was there, and Jesus, tired as he was from the journey, sat down by the well. It was about noon.
for we are members of his body.
A kind of spear
kind of bird
“Aeneas,” Peter said to him, “Jesus Christ heals you. Get up and roll up your mat.” Immediately Aeneas got up.
to demand a retribution for assumed guilt such as ridicule or for not keeping an appointment; a forfeit
My purpose is that they may be encouraged in heart and united in love, so that they may have the full riches of complete understanding, in order that they may know the mystery of God, namely, Christ,
lack
But I want you to know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins.” So he said to the paralyzed man, “Get up, take your mat and go home.”
A good man brings good things out of the good stored up in his heart, and an evil man brings evil things out of the evil stored up in his heart. For the mouth speaks what the heart is full of.
To the rest I say this (I, not the Lord): If any brother has a wife who is not a believer and she is willing to live with him, he must not divorce her.
result
go around in circles
but Saul learned of their plan. Day and night they kept close watch on the city gates in order to kill him.
They answered as Jesus had told them to, and the people let them go.
This was to fulfill the word of Isaiah the prophet: "Lord, who has believed our message and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?"
eat up
Whoever claims to live in him must live as Jesus did.
adequate
Now these things occurred as examples to keep us from setting our hearts on evil things as they did.
Too much
A person who travels with the current as he goes downriver by raft, he will be watching out so that the front part will not get rammed into a cliff so that it won't be capsized.
and again, "The Lord knows that the thoughts of the wise are futile."
One might even say that Levi, who collects the tenth, paid the tenth through Abraham,
I have written you in my letter not to associate with sexually immoral people--
wave offering using a chicken
The water is murky.
“You unbelieving and perverse generation,” Jesus replied, “how long shall I stay with you and put up with you? Bring your son here.”
At once the girl hurried in to the king with the request: "I want you to give me right now the head of John the Baptist on a platter."
Dark rainclouds, thunderheads
to release, as trigger of a trap
He replied, “You of little faith, why are you so afraid?” Then he got up and rebuked the winds and the waves, and it was completely calm.
And Jesus grew in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man.
Familiar spirit.
lay something parallel to something else.
To figure in someone's dream which foretells some bad circumstance
This became known all over Joppa, and many people believed in the Lord.
tired physically
As for a person exalting [himself], when in a discussion, he loudly brags and says, “My own name is that which is able to lift up our companion who is overwhelmed by (lit. drowning in) a problem.”
If perfection could have been attained through the Levitical priesthood (for on the basis of it the law was given to the people), why was there still need for another priest to come--one in the order of Melchizedek, not in the order of Aaron?
To make short, quick, side motions with a bolo on a flat surface
yellow
Are not all angels ministering spirits sent to serve those who will inherit salvation?
How much more valuable is a person than a sheep! Therefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath.”
“Lord,” Ananias answered, “I have heard many reports about this man and all the harm he has done to your holy people in Jerusalem.
A kind of conical fish trap
When one of those at the table with him heard this, he said to Jesus, "Blessed is the man who will e
Then Jesus replied, "Have I not chosen you, the Twelve? Yet one of you is a devil!"
Rice husks
sprinkle
The chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for evidence against Jesus so that they could put him to death, but they did not find any.
As for the expression amba-an, two or three people line up one after another to float on some object.
I will strike her children dead. Then all the churches will know that I am he who searches hearts and minds, and I will repay each of you according to your deeds.
For he longs for all of you and is distressed because you heard he was ill.
Much time had been lost, and sailing had already become dangerous because by now it was after the Day of Atonement. So Paul warned them,
post
Those who accepted his message were baptized, and about three thousand were added to their number that day.
When I was informed of a plot to be carried out against the man, I sent him to you at once. I also ordered his accusers to present to you their case against him.
Jesus looked at him and loved him. "One thing you lack," he said. "Go, sell everything you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me."
At first his disciples did not understand all this. Only after Jesus was glorified did they realize that these things had been written about him and that these things had been done to him.
As Jesus was saying these things, a woman in the crowd called out, "Blessed is the mother who gave you birth and nursed you."
When we teach a child to write his/her name, we say, Do it like this to write. Included in the meaning is our demonstration as we teach.
Therefore I urge you to imitate me.
Strands of long hair hanging in front of the ears
collapse.
First, you call [the sleeping person]. If he doesn't sense it we take hold of him so that he will be disturbed from sleep.
Then they were willing to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat reached the shore where they were heading.
though I myself have reasons for such confidence.
perseverance, character; and character, hope.
As for that person who is persistent, he keeps coming back until he is able to get that for which he was begging. It's as though the person from whom he is making a request is forced [to give it].
His tail swept a third of the stars out of the sky and flung them to the earth. The dragon stood in front of the woman who was about to give birth, so that he might devour her child the moment it was born.
kind of rat with a white tail tip
We will wait three months before we look at the log which we have knotted to cultivate grubs to see if there are now white grubs.
They replied, "Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you will be saved--you and your household."
There is only one Lawgiver and Judge, the one who is able to save and destroy. But you--who are you to judge your neighbor?
Some time ago Theudas appeared, claiming to be somebody, and about four hundred men rallied to him. He was killed, all his followers were dispersed, and it all came to nothing.
It will be just like this on the day the Son of Man is revealed.
sharpened slivers of bamboo
For whatever is hidden is meant to be disclosed, and whatever is concealed is meant to be brought out into the open.
So they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
Now if I do what I do not want to do, it is no longer I who do it, but it is sin living in me that does it.
What then shall we say that Abraham, our forefather according to the flesh, discovered in this matter?
That is the person who is talkative who is continually speaking, the one who doesn’t hesitate to speak
Cartilage appendage to ribs
First, you call [the sleeping person]. If he doesn't sense it we take hold of him so that he will be disturbed from sleep.
He who does what is sinful is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the beginning. The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the devil's work.
When we were drawn to God, our love (lit. breath) for God was increased. He alone was the one who drew us [to Himself].
Thomas said to him, “Lord, we don’t know where you are going, so how can we know the way?”
Each person in a given group wearing a bolo.
The earthquake is strong.
When I fetch the person, I will take the raft across to him.
to come loose, be separated
The clam shells are gathered together to be processed into lime.
"When someone invites you to a wedding feast, do not take the place of honor, for a person more distinguished than you may have been invited.
Pay later in afternoon
And of this gospel I was appointed a herald and an apostle and a teacher.
Off and on showers
Do not let any unwholesome talk come out of your mouths, but only what is helpful for building others up according to their needs, that it may benefit those who listen.
But they shouted, “Take him away! Take him away! Crucify him!” “Shall I crucify your king?” Pilate asked. “We have no king but Caesar,” the chief priests answered.
To have become pregnant on someone (such as the male spouse)
We doubt that it will be paid back.
When it was time for Elizabeth to have her baby, she gave birth to a son.
Fish eggs
Two or more people shoot with arrows or plunge spears into a pig or chicken to insure its deaths.
For in Scripture it says: “See, I lay a stone in Zion, a chosen and precious cornerstone, and the one who trusts in him will never be put to shame.”
When Jesus saw his mother there, and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, "Dear woman, here is your son,"
With negative, not to be able to bear or endure something.
venom
Inside
They got up and returned at once to Jerusalem. There they found the Eleven 1567 and those with them, assembled together
If it bears fruit next year, fine! If not, then cut it down.' "
“Blessed are you when people insult you, persecute you and falsely say all kinds of evil against you because of me.
shoulder blade
When we look at the date of a month, we need to reserve a time when there is nothing which will conflict so that the gathering will happen.
The elders who are leaders are the ones who have the responsibility for the various areas.
“I am the vine; you are the branches. If you remain in me and I in you, you will bear much fruit; apart from me you can do nothing.”
to Jesus the mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that speaks a better word than the blood of Abel.
On the contrary, they recognized that I had been entrusted with the task of preaching the gospel to the uncircumcised, just as Peter had been to the circumcised.
To find to be or to have become something.
Great grandparent
Whoever believes in the Son has eternal life, but whoever rejects the Son will not see life, for God’s wrath remains on them.
For anyone who speaks in a tongue does not speak to people but to God. Indeed, no one understands them; they utter mysteries by the Spirit.
They are wild waves of the sea, foaming up their shame; wandering stars, for whom blackest darkness has been reserved forever.
The number of those who ate was about five thousand men, besides women and children.
get repeatedly or thoroughly lost
bolo
The cat tipped over the sugar.
A buck.
Is it right for us to pay taxes to Caesar or not?"
Even the ghosts, they groan because they are intentionally trying to scare us.
As for a flower, its roots suck-up water.
I tell you the truth, if anyone keeps my word, he will never see death."
scoot forward
As for a love charm, we put a love charm on a girl if we don't have the courage to ask
error
dried green tobacco
Now, brothers, I want to remind you of the gospel I preached to you, which you received and on which you have taken your stand.
He didn't catch the ball which was thrown because it passed him but another person was able to catch it
Near the cross of Jesus stood his mother, his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene.
By faith he kept the Passover and the sprinkling of blood, so that the destroyer of the firstborn would not touch the firstborn of Israel.
old man; joker
Potty or bladder
Likewise, every good tree bears good fruit, but a bad tree bears bad fruit.  A good tree cannot bear bad fruit, and a bad tree cannot bear good fruit.
When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
To deliberately let
If there are those who are having a sacrificial ceremony, they constantly play a rhythm on a drum. The drum which is played is beaten with sticks or one's hands.
He was given power to make war against the saints and to conquer them. And he was given authority over every tribe, people, language and nation.
Time when moon shines brightly
which you have prepared in the sight of all nations:
To die before one harvests his field
What advantage, then, is there in being a Jew, or what value is there in circumcision?
The Son of Man will go just as it is written about him. But woe to that man who betrays the Son of Man! It would be better for him if he had not been born."
forceful
The gaze of the older monkey was behind him because they were watching their young offspring.
John’s disciples came and took his body and buried it. Then they went and told Jesus.
Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, "Go and make preparations for us to eat the Passover."
If we are burning [a field] and there is stong wind, there will be a lot of live embers which will leap up and over to another mountain which will also be burned up.
Flesh gives birth to flesh, but the Spirit gives birth to spirit.
A jar of wine vinegar was there, so they soaked a sponge in it, put the sponge on a stalk of the hyssop plant, and lifted it to Jesus' lips.
When they had seen him, they spread the word concerning what had been told them about this child,
The hearth frame was burned.
Let no debt remain outstanding, except the continuing debt to love one another, for whoever loves others has fulfilled the law.
As for camote plants, when we plant them, the roots follow the stem (lit. body).
When we have guests, when the food is served, we get it started [by saying], “Friend, let’s eat now.” We are inviting [him] to come and eat (lit. that we-dual will eat).
they will flog him and kill him. On the third day he will rise again.”
miniature house
And when the blood of your martyr Stephen was shed, I stood there giving my approval and guarding the clothes of those who were killing him.'
bite aggressively
And the teachers of the law who came down from Jerusalem said, "He is possessed by Beelzebub ! By the prince of demons he is driving out demons."
Quit talking because I am getting fed up with you, and I will have to get back at you.
And so we know and rely on the love God has for us. God is love. Whoever lives in love lives in God, and God in him.
After this, Joseph sent for his father Jacob and his whole family, seventy-five in all.
As for a stringy camoty,  it isn't seen until it is cookedl
limp
For what we preach is not ourselves, but Jesus Christ as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus’ sake.
There was a written notice above him, which read:
A large, multicolored poisonous snake.
Guardian
Upper arm or neck of a musical instrument like a guitar or kuglung.
Lisanta’s mother is complimented because she doesn’t misbehave.
"So then, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the vision from heaven.
Mixed fur (black, grey, white); striped grey cat fur
To tear
hide
A little off-kilter
One begins to make a basket. Whatever kind of woven basket, that is the initial stage of weaving a basket.
When Usì’s wife sows rice seed, she casts in all directions.
They are also seven kings. Five have fallen, one is, the other has not yet come; but when he does come, he must remain for only a little while.
If someone is stabbed by a raider, the spear will pierce and go through [the body].
We’re irritated because we have to walk.
Everyone who sins breaks the law; in fact, sin is lawlessness.
filth, grime
How many
As surely as the truth of Christ is in me, nobody in the regions of Achaia will stop this boasting of mine.
Old
get one’s attention
When they arrived at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the Jewish synagogues. John was with them as their helper.
To spill out and scatter
They have been informed that you teach all the Jews who live among the Gentiles to turn away from Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or live according to our customs.
If we confront [someone], we go to his house and there we will confront  him. The [word] supmat is the same as that you are confronting him because you speak to him.
pound leftover unhusked rice kernels
What reason do you give for this current theft of yours?
They all ate and were satisfied,
To be acquainted with or familiar with something.
As for flour, if we shake the sack of flour, it will become dust because it becomes airborne.
When they heard this sound, a crowd came together in bewilderment, because each one heard their own language being spoken.
These books are stacked on top of each other.
Leaving the crowd behind, they took him along, just as he was, in the boat. There were also other boats with him.
and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge in the image of its Creator.
The Manobos who went to Manila were slow to return to Davao.
redeem
weapon.
I say to you that many will come from the east and the west, and will take their places at the feast with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven.
The flood of the Liboganon will come right up to us.
They stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him,
Beach or rocky bottom of a river
smoke out bees
If I send them home hungry, they will collapse on the way, because some of them have come a long distance."
f we move to another place, we are just outsiders. Even if they are our fellow Manobos, we are still outsiders because it is not our place.
confused.
One couple
Brother-in-law of a man
Wood that is quick-burning always flames and then quickly burns up when used to build a fire.
Then some of our companions went to the tomb and found it just as the women had said, but him they did not see."
Why are you cursing  me?
So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
It does not dishonor others, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs.
Brother will betray brother to death, and a father his child; children will rebel against their parents and have them put to death.
To possess, or own, something
The next day Agrippa and Bernice came with great pomp and entered the audience room with the high ranking officers and the leading men of the city. At the command of Festus, Paul was brought in.
We’ll have Tungonu go downriver in our place.
Should we pay or shouldn't we?"
sunny, dry weather
Then he said to them all: “Whoever wants to be my disciple must deny themselves and take up their cross daily and follow me.
Again Peter denied it, and at that moment a rooster began to crow.
if the end of the pangi fruit is ripening, it is right for us to take [it] and eat and suck and chew the fruit off of the seed.
Day before yesterday
He sent still a third, and they wounded him and threw him out.
sleep tight
He entered the house of God, and he and his companions ate the consecrated bread—which was not lawful for them to do, but only for the priests.
Then the high priest tore his clothes and said, “He has spoken blasphemy! Why do we need any more witnesses? Look, now you have heard the blasphemy.
and Levi got up, left everything and followed him.
But if that place is abandoned, it will be quiet; there will be no more people and no talking that we can hear.
A cavern or a tunnel
Those who have served well gain an excellent standing and great assurance in their faith in Christ Jesus.
When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I put childish ways behind me.
Anyone who welcomes him shares in his wicked work.
slide or cut kernels from a corncob
The God and Father of the Lord Jesus, who is to be praised forever, knows that I am not lying.
Continually scratch as a dog with mange
The reason for whispering.
clear up
launder
Indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, the synagogue ruler said to the people, "There are six days for work. So come and be healed on those days, not on the Sabbath."
God did extraordinary miracles through Paul,
For we cannot do anything against the truth, but only for the truth.
At the end of harvesting sweet potatoes, when the sweet potatoes are washed in the river/creek (lit. water), we cut off the roots at the tips
Bamboo hat
come from, originate
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for me and for the gospel will save it.
As for a step-father, he isn't the real father.
The owner of the camote field said, “I'm fencing these camotes of mine.”
Charcoal.
When Jesus saw Nathanael approaching, he said of him, “Here truly is an Israelite in whom there is no deceit.”
He does his work diligently. He needs to work.
We’re cursed [by being dreamt about] so that we will die.
You sympathized with those in prison and joyfully accepted the confiscation of your property, because you knew that you yourselves had better and lasting possessions.
As for aluminum roofing which is very thin, it easily becomes dented when we step on it as we are using it to make a roof.
to insult
constricted
making the most of every opportunity, because the days are evil.
To squeal, yelp, yell in pain or fear.
“Very truly I tell you, when you were younger you dressed yourself and went where you wanted; but when you are old you will stretch out your hands, and someone else will dress you and lead you where you do not want to go.”
It seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us not to burden you with anything beyond the following requirements:
but we had hoped that he was the one who was going to redeem Israel. And what is more, it is the third day since all this took place.
Bad luck
to have an indented medial line on the stomach (as a female turtle)
kept awake
To bend something
Therefore, dear friends, since you already know this, be on your guard so that you may not be carried away by the error of lawless men and fall from your secure position.
large brown earthworm
I do all this for the sake of the gospel, that I may share in its blessings.
in order that Satan might not outwit us. For we are not unaware of his schemes.
frighten each other
Gallbladder
You killed the author of life, but God raised him from the dead. We are witnesses of this.
But if it is by the Spirit of God that I drive out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
So give the order for the tomb to be made secure until the third day. Otherwise, his disciples may come and steal the body and tell the people that he has been raised from the dead. This last deception will be worse than the first.”
For my Father's will is that everyone who looks to the Son and believes in him shall have eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day."
The one who is not circumcised physically and yet obeys the law will condemn you who, even though you have the written code and circumcision, are a lawbreaker.
“Here is my servant whom I have chosen, the one I love, in whom I delight; I will put my Spirit on him, and he will proclaim justice to the nations.
apply a liquid to the hair
wiggle one’s scalp.
A kind of fruit.
The light of a lamp will never shine in you again. The voice of bridegroom and bride will never be heard in you again. Your merchants were the world's great men. By your magic spell all the nations were led astray.
but the people there did not welcome him, because he was heading for Jerusalem.
Reddish-yellow hair (person, dog, pig)
God presented Christ as a sacrifice of atonement, through the shedding of his blood—to be received by faith. He did this to demonstrate his righteousness, because in his forbearance he had left the sins committed beforehand unpunished—
Then some of the Pharisees and teachers of the law said to him, “Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.”
reimburse
Now on his way to Jerusalem, Jesus traveled along the border between Samaria and Galilee.
Memories of someone will be brought back and we will feel very sad .
Jesus told his disciples: “There was a rich man whose manager was accused of wasting his possessions.
When his parents saw him, they were astonished. His mother said to him, “Son, why have you treated us like this? Your father and I have been anxiously searching for you.”
Fierce; quick to anger
Jesus answered, "I tell you, Peter, before the rooster crows today, you will deny three times that you know me."
to remove something, as laundry
To cry out, scream.
And you also are among those Gentiles who are called to belong to Jesus Christ.
The wind blows wherever it pleases. You hear its sound, but you cannot tell where it comes from or where it is going. So it is with everyone born of the Spirit.”
Hold them in the highest regard in love because of their work. Live in peace with each other.
greed, malice, deceit, lewdness, envy, slander, arrogance and folly.
A person, if he has something to tell his companion, he will just whisper what he is saying into the ear of his companion whatever it is they are hiding and just [the] two of them know about their agreement.
grow
Then they asked him, "What must we do to do the works God requires?"
core of wood or raw camotes
I became a servant of this gospel by the gift of God’s grace given me through the working of his power.
It is burdensome to travel. We don't feel like traveling (lit. feel lazy/weary to travel). We won't follow through if we feel weary.
As it is written: “There is no one righteous, not even one;
And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God and from his power, and no one could enter the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed.
The centurion heard of Jesus and sent some elders of the Jews to him, asking him to come and heal his servant.
rodent
pine
We sit in a circle to eat together. There is just one receptacle where food is served.
Therefore we do not lose heart. Though outwardly we are wasting away, yet inwardly we are being renewed day by day
fall or slide downhill
The angel said to the women, “Do not be afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified.
He will reply, ‘Truly I tell you, whatever you did not do for one of the least of these, you did not do for me.’
Then Paul called one of the centurions and said, "Take this young man to the commander; he has something to tell him."
Wear your shoes.
Even if it is not our relative (lit. companion) if we empathize with the one weeping, we will offer comfort by saying that it is natural that we die.
mortar for pounding rice
And when I was with you and needed something, I was not a burden to anyone, for the brothers who came from Macedonia supplied what I needed. I have kept myself from being a burden to you in any way, and will continue to do so.
What business is it of mine to judge those outside the church? Are you not to judge those inside? God will judge those outside. "Expel the wicked man from among you."
Then he said to Thomas, "Put your finger here; see my hands. Reach out your hand and put it into my side. Stop doubting and believe."
“No,” said Peter, “you shall never wash my feet.” Jesus answered, “Unless I wash you, you have no part with me.”
I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End.
When all the people were being baptized, Jesus was baptized too. And as he was praying, heaven was opened
musical sound of the kuglung.
If anyone speaks in a tongue, two--or at the most three--should speak, one at a time, and someone must interpret.
Medium-sized smooth bamboo (used for rafts, walls, roofing)
When Mary reached the place where Jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet and said, "Lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died."
If we ask about it, we won't go inside the house if their men are not there so that we won’t be falsely accused.
edible ferns
which is his body, the fullness of him who fills everything in every way.
Engulfed in a problem (quarrel turns into war)
If anyone says anything to you, say that the Lord needs them, and he will send them right away.”
And I will give power to my two witnesses, and they will prophesy for 1,260 days, clothed in sackcloth."
that he lavished on us. With all wisdom and understanding,
be wavy, have multiple curves
For my eyes have seen your salvation,
We hold onto the pole by which we’re tried.
The voice of that girl is beautiful; her tone is good.
“But not during the festival,” they said, “or there may be a riot among the people.”
Not straight, not level, or off center
At this, the man's ears were opened, his tongue was loosened and he began to speak plainly.
Jesus found a young donkey and sat on it, as it is written:
These men went on ahead and waited for us at Troas.
Endure hardship as discipline; God is treating you as his children. For what children are not disciplined by their father?
We were therefore buried with him through baptism into death in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, we too may live a new life.
take the floor apart
It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres.
stuff one’s mouth with food
As he was scattering the seed, some fell along the path, and the birds came and ate it up.
“The virgin will conceive and give birth to a son, and they will call him Immanuel” (which means “God with us”).
A third of mankind was killed by the three plagues of fire, smoke and sulfur that came out of their mouths.
A tree that is being felled makes a loud cracking sound as it falls over.
For the Father loves the Son and shows him all he does. Yes, and he will show him even greater works than these, so that you will be amazed.
Now there is in store for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will award to me on that day—and not only to me, but also to all who have longed for his appearing.
Are not five sparrows sold for two pennies ? Yet not one of them is forgotten by God.
We are expect that the plane [may come] tomorrow
To him who is able to keep you from falling and to present you before his glorious presence without fault and with great joy-- to the only God our Savior be glory, majesty, power and authority, through Jesus Christ our Lord, before all ages, now and forevermore! Amen.
But blessed are your eyes because they see, and your ears because they hear.
Surrounding the throne were twenty-four other thrones, and seated on the thrones were twenty-four elders. They were dressed in white and had crowns of gold on their heads.
To become night
To set aside by itself
When it is clear what she is after, [then] she will ask for it.
But the Pharisees said, “It is by the prince of demons that he drives out demons.”
"I tell you the truth, if anyone says to this mountain, 'Go, throw yourself into the sea,' and does not doubt in his heart but believes that what he says will happen, it will be done for him.
But I will punish the nation they serve as slaves,’ God said, ‘and afterward they will come out of that country and worship me in this place.’
If the tongue is clamped down on [by one’s teeth], it may become inadvertantly severed.
4When I saw that they were not acting in line with the truth of the gospel, I said to Peter in front of them all, "You are a Jew, yet you live like a Gentile and not like a Jew. How is it, then, that you force Gentiles to follow Jewish customs?
pity
Stay
Since an overseer manages God’s household, he must be blameless—not overbearing, not quick-tempered, not given to drunkenness, not violent, not pursuing dishonest gain.
When Jesus heard this, he was amazed and said to those following him, “Truly I tell you, I have not found anyone in Israel with such great faith.
Then he called the crowd to him along with his disciples and said: "If anyone would come after me, he must deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.
When he saw it, he was amazed at the sight. As he went over to get a closer look, he heard the Lord say:
In the afternoon (lit. when it is afternoon already), the leaves of the baluy or lumlon [plant] are smoothed out with a corn cob so they can be tightly rolled up.
If we have a companion who has conduct which cannot be changed, we give up on teaching him to do good.
But after I have risen, I will go ahead of you into Galilee."
Give me [some] soap.
come for
long hair at neck
Is the cat perhaps older than the horse?
One person says, “You are his slave after all..” I will respond, “Yes indeed because I am his pangabaga “representative”
There was a person whose clothing was torn and so he patched it by sewing on [a piece of] material.
When the ten heard about this, they were indignant with the two brothers.
The knife which has no more temper has become raw and cannot be used because it will not cut because there is no more [sharp] edge.
And it was not without an oath! Others became priests without any oath, but he became a priest with an oath when God said to him: "The Lord has sworn and will not change his mind: 'You are a priest forever.' "
At once they left their nets and followed him.
Material, cloth.
Unravel as thread of a net or woven material
Your gold and silver are corroded. Their corrosion will testify against you and eat your flesh like fire. You have hoarded wealth in the last days.
to cut by repeatedly slashing
middle finger
In Joppa there was a disciple named Tabitha (in Greek her name is Dorcas); she was always doing good and helping the poor.
Through Jesus, therefore, let us continually offer to God a sacrifice of praise--the fruit of lips that confess his name.
While Jesus was having dinner at Matthew’s house, many tax collectors and sinners came and ate with him and his disciples.
obbiung tune and dance.
When we plant corn, we get a snall basket in which to put the rice and we strap it here at [our] waist.
and cry out: “ ‘Woe! Woe to you, great city, dressed in fine linen, purple and scarlet, and glittering with gold, precious stones and pearls!
A woman giving birth to a child has pain because her time has come; but when her baby is born she forgets the anguish because of her joy that a child is born into the world.
Poison used to harm or kill an enemy
menstruate
"It was because your hearts were hard that Moses wrote you this law," Jesus replied.
‘In the last days, God says, I will pour out my Spirit on all people. Your sons and daughters will prophesy, your young men will see visions, your old men will dream dreams.
When all the people who had gathered to witness this sight saw what took place, they beat their breasts and went away
They brought it to Jesus, threw their cloaks on the colt and put Jesus on it.
see out of corner of eye
When many children are playing, they move about in all directions as they don't stay in one place. They are going in different directions.
happen close together
fall out
Put out of joint
I know your deeds, that you are neither cold nor hot. I wish you were either one or the other!
They have power to shut up the heavens so that it will not rain during the time they are prophesying; and they have power to turn the waters into blood and to strike the earth with every kind of plague as often as they want.
a light for revelation to the Gentiles, and the glory of your people Israel.”
The person with good character: He isn’t a liar, he doesn’t gossip/start scandals, he is afraid to do bad things, he humbles himself.
The two countries are at war with each other.
If their relationship is good, their relationship will develop.
When Jesus came to the region of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, “Who do people say the Son of Man is?”
For Jesus had commanded the impure spirit to come out of the man. Many times it had seized him, and though he was chained hand and foot and kept under guard, he had broken his chains and had been driven by the demon into solitary places.
For what I received I passed on to you as of first importance: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures,
"We are not stoning you for any of these," replied the Jews, "but for blasphemy, because you, a mere man, claim to be God."
where he stayed three months. Because some Jews had plotted against him just as he was about to sail for Syria, he decided to go back through Macedonia.
Cough up
But Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.
“To the angel of the church in Sardis write: These are the words of him who holds the seven spirits of God and the seven stars. I know your deeds; you have a reputation of being alive, but you are dead.
Is your lip twisted?
And masters, treat your slaves in the same way. Do not threaten them, since you know that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and there is no favoritism with him.
Surely you remember, brothers, our toil and hardship; we worked night and day in order not to be a burden to anyone while we preached the gospel of God to you.
But the temple he had spoken of was his body.
The cob of the corn, it is its stem on the inside [of the ear of corn].
To identify, such as to narrow down to the one person whom one would marry.
"But they all alike began to make excuses. The first said, 'I have just bought a field, and I must go and see it. Please excuse me.'
The person, he is repeatedly carrying wood on his shoulders to use to for building a fire.
Kind of millet (various grain colors: reddish-brown, black, white)
The horses are racing each other.
Then I saw three impure spirits that looked like frogs; they came out of the mouth of the dragon, out of the mouth of the beast and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
say
Pilate said, "Take him yourselves and judge him by your own law."
I eagerly expect and hope that I will in no way be ashamed, but will have sufficient courage so that now as always Christ will be exalted in my body, whether by life or by death.
Jesus said, "You have now seen him; in fact, he is the one speaking with you."
Therefore, holy brothers, who share in the heavenly calling, fix your thoughts on Jesus, the apostle and high priest whom we confess.
We are witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him.”
Peter declared, "Even if all fall away, I will not."
They were looking intently up into the sky as he was going, when suddenly two men dressed in white stood beside them.
to become hard or firm
So they hurried off and found Mary and Joseph, and the baby, who was lying in the manger.
This man was handed over to you by God’s deliberate plan and foreknowledge; and you, with the help of wicked men, put him to death by nailing him to the cross.
Don’t you know that those who serve in the temple get their food from the temple, and that those who serve at the altar share in what is offered on the altar?
Then they turned again to the blind man, “What have you to say about him? It was your eyes he opened.” The man replied, “He is a prophet.”
Flour, if we shake the flour sack, it will become dust because [the flour] becomes airborne.
confront.
The Lord is not slow in keeping his promise, as some understand slowness. Instead he is patient with you, not wanting anyone to perish, but everyone to come to repentance.
Then Peter said, “Ananias, how is it that Satan has so filled your heart that you have lied to the Holy Spirit and have kept for yourself some of the money you received for the land?
to uproot, remove old camotes
If the water is lukewarm, it isn't very hot.
We are going back and forth while passing through the village
“Why do your disciples break the tradition of the elders? They don’t wash their hands before they eat!”
love song to a girl
Abundant foods.
But he replied, ‘Truly I tell you, I don’t know you.’
they will pick up snakes with their hands; and when they drink deadly poison, it will not hurt them at all; they will place their hands on sick people, and they will get well."
Therefore I tell you that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a people who will produce its fruit.
Dear friend, do not imitate what is evil but what is good. Anyone who does what is good is from God. Anyone who does what is evil has not seen God.
You may be giving thanks well enough, but the other man is not edified.
The thing struck is a piece of bolo.
We made temporary use of Minor’s house because our house wasn’t yet finished
so he got up from the meal, took off his outer clothing, and wrapped a towel around his waist.
Joaquin is still the one who has the authority of being the captain of Barangay Gupitan.
If anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
fragrant
You just used it to trick us so that you would be able to sow your field.
and they can no longer die; for they are like the angels. They are God's children, since they are children of the resurrection.
The next day Jesus decided to leave for Galilee. Finding Philip, he said to him, “Follow me.”
Blisters
The thick cloud which is dark is a thunder cloud.
be the one’s to do something
John said to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him, “You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Finally the temple guards went back to the chief priests and Pharisees, who asked them, "Why didn't you bring him in?"
Groggy
Chest or breastbone of meat, brisket.
Jesus said, "This voice was for your benefit, not mine.
pronged fish spear
But there [are those] who relentlessly pursue something who can't express what they [want] to say.
The water carried away the corn which had not yet been divided into shares.
His son by the slave woman was born according to the flesh, but his son by the free woman was born as the result of a divine promise.
And he will send his angels and gather his elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of the heavens.
ve found you out.“What is your secret about me?”
No matter what I do to boost [my] strength, I just continue to feel weak.
liquor
Then the devil left him, and angels came and attended him.
give freely
Make room for us in your hearts. We have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have exploited no one.
happened to
scatter, as rocks or gravel
measure of distance
Material for baby swing or cradle
A kind of basket (liang) woven by strands of two.
Grandfather Amasig heard that I was worried about my saw.
Become tangled
kind of weed with thorns
And he has given us this command: Whoever loves God must also love his brother.
However, I consider my life worth nothing to me, if only I may finish the race and complete the task the Lord Jesus has given me--the task of testifying to the gospel of God's grace.
A kind of wood.
When it was almost time for the Jewish Passover, many went up from the country to Jerusalem for their ceremonial cleansing before the Passover.
encircle
What
fly, as a bird or airplane
When we had sailed across the open sea off the coast of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we landed at Myra in Lycia.
Jesus stopped and said, "Call him." So they called to the blind man, "Cheer up! On your feet! He's calling you."
to taste
mourn for the dead
As for a love charm, we use it on a girl if we don't have the courage to ask if she is interested.
Then Jesus left the vicinity of Tyre and went through Sidon, down to the Sea of Galilee and into the region of the Decapolis.
produce
Rattan is what we use to reinforce it.
You’re going to suffer a change of circumstances tomorrow when your companions aren’t here.
then make my joy complete by being like-minded, having the same love, being one in spirit and of one mind.
Then the high priest stood up before them and asked Jesus, "Are you not going to answer? What is this testimony that these men are bringing against you?"
The process of making something.
tune of kobbiung or kuglung
Then Simon answered, “Pray to the Lord for me so that nothing you have said may happen to me.”
Mature
Jew’s harp
Instead, speaking the truth in love, we will grow to become in every respect the mature body of him who is the head, that is, Christ.
?
Although he was a son, he learned obedience from what he suffered
Do you think I came to bring peace on earth? No, I tell you, but division.
Some in the crowd shouted one thing and some another, and since the commander could not get at the truth because of the uproar, he ordered that Paul be taken into the barracks.
four (counting)
A stream that joins the Liboganon at the same place the Magimon river flows into the Liboganon.
Did the word of God originate with you? Or are you the only people it has reached?
roll something
One of them, an expert in the law, tested him with this question:
But the Counselor, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you all things and will remind you of everything I have said to you.
Flee from sexual immorality. All other sins a person commits are outside the body, but whoever sins sexually, sins against their own body.
steps to a porch or on a hillside
Looking at his disciples, he said: “Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.
Those who think they know something do not yet know as they ought to know.
Guard the good deposit that was entrusted to you--guard it with the help of the Holy Spirit who lives in us.
several bathing
"Make level paths for your feet," so that the lame may not be disabled, but rather healed.
Then Jesus went back across the Jordan to the place where John had been baptizing in the early days. Here he stayed
If I get home first, you will be the one to fetch water.
People have kidney(s) in their body(s).
If we have vertigo dizziness, the house goes around when we look.
A person who is fishing on a tributary of the river blocks the tributary so that it will dry up.
He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High. The Lord God will give him the throne of his father David,
If this report gets to the governor, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble.”
While they were wondering about this, suddenly two men in clothes that gleamed like lightning stood beside them.
Stick
When evening came, Jesus arrived with the Twelve.
We have different gifts, according to the grace given to each of us. If your gift is prophesying, then prophesy in accordance with your faith;
If those days had not been cut short, no one would survive, but for the sake of the elect those days will be cut short.
When he was at the table with them, he took bread, gave thanks, broke it and began to give it to them.
catch
About eight days after Jesus said this, he took Peter, John and James with him and went up onto a mountain to pray.
Now for some time a man named Simon had practiced sorcery in the city and amazed all the people of Samaria. He boasted that he was someone great,
brush flies away from one's face
Then there came flashes of lightning, rumblings, peals of thunder and a severe earthquake. No earthquake like it has ever occurred since man has been on earth, so tremendous was the quake.
To be full or satiated (from food)
The teacher puts up with the child who is always asking questions.
A red wild chicken which has a loud crow is called batug.
Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there.
too full
To get something in the eye
country
I am coming soon. Hold on to what you have, so that no one will take your crown.
"Do not let your hearts be troubled. Trust in God ; trust also in me.
approach a house when the occupants are sleeping
fill a basket
To make a crunchy sound (as when chewing crisp crackers)
difficult, dangerous
pour
Therefore, my dear brothers, stand firm. Let nothing move you. Always give yourselves fully to the work of the Lord, because you know that your labor in the Lord is not in vain.
A kind of dried fish
Simon the Zealot and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed him.
The monkey eats an awful lot
married couple
Be joyful in hope, patient in affliction, faithful in prayer.
“Take a guard,” Pilate answered. “Go, make the tomb as secure as you know how.”
May he strengthen your hearts so that you will be blameless and holy in the presence of our God and Father when our Lord Jesus comes with all his holy ones.
God is patient.
They produced false witnesses, who testified, “This fellow never stops speaking against this holy place and against the law.
He told them still another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like yeast that a woman took and mixed into about sixty pounds of flour until it worked all through the dough.”
hard shell
If they still refuse to listen, tell it to the church; and if they refuse to listen even to the church, treat them as you would a pagan or a tax collector.
A black bird
Small fishhook
For it is commendable if a man bears up under the pain of unjust suffering because he is conscious of God.
The spirit shrieked, convulsed him violently and came out. The boy looked so much like a corpse that many said, "He's dead."
If many get on a raft, it will become submerged just under the surface of the water.
To bend body in half so that one’s head is in his lap
Hill forested with tall trees
But you, brothers and sisters, are not in darkness so that this day should surprise you like a thief.
position of the moon before it reaches the zenith
After this, Jesus went around in Galilee. He did not want to go about in Judea because the Jewish leaders there were looking for a way to kill him.
Do not lie to each other, since you have taken off your old self with its practices
‘These who were hired last worked only one hour,’ they said, ‘and you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden of the work and the heat of the day.’
burn
To lie down on one's back
Although they know God’s righteous decree that those who do such things deserve death, they not only continue to do these very things but also approve of those who practice them.
the twenty-four elders fall down before him who sits on the throne, and worship him who lives for ever and ever. They lay their crowns before the throne and say:
"First let the children eat all they want," he told her, "for it is not right to take the children's bread and toss it to their dogs."
Be on your guard; stand firm in the faith; be men of courage; be strong.
juice or sap of vegetables and fruits
"Have faith in God," Jesus answered.
The poor you will always have with you, but you will not always have me.
Spear shaft
Praise your child
But the one who prophesies speaks to people for their strengthening, encouraging and comfort.
You foolish Galatians! Who has bewitched you? Before your very eyes Jesus Christ was clearly portrayed as crucified.
Woe to you when everyone speaks well of you, for that is how their ancestors treated the false prophets.
surround
Bear with each other and forgive whatever grievances you may have against one another. Forgive as the Lord forgave you.
Produce fruit in keeping with repentance.
Rebuke her because she’s always visiting
I tell you the truth, all the sins and blasphemies of men will be forgiven them.
But mark this: There will be terrible times in the last days.
pass through, as water leaking through a pot
"Behold, I am coming soon! Blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy in this book."
To commit oneself to revenge, or to get back at someone.
[As for] the old person, he is unable to get around as he walks because his knees are hurt ing.
But John tried to deter him, saying, “I need to be baptized by you, and do you come to me?”
The one who calls you is faithful and he will do it.
white breasted dove with red head.
But the day Lot left Sodom, fire and sulfur rained down from heaven and destroyed them all.
They arrived at Ephesus, where Paul left Priscilla and Aquila. He himself went into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.
Niya is of great value to me because he is the one to whom I am able to entrust [with my field work].
“Why do you ask me about what is good?” Jesus replied. “There is only One who is good. If you want to enter life, keep the commandments.”
Elihud the father of Eleazar, Eleazar the father of Matthan, Matthan the father of Jacob,
He said to them, “You are the ones who justify yourselves in the eyes of others, but God knows your hearts. What people value highly is detestable in God’s sight.
short-waisted blouse.
You are the same height
Set it out of the way here.
In our place, we don't show respect to someone unless they have been made a leader.
Large abdomen
We will let our companion know that we have guests who have arrived.
Therefore, whoever takes the lowly position of this child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
You should to find out the truth of what you say.
The whole assembly became silent as they listened to Barnabas and Paul telling about the signs and wonders God had done among the Gentiles through them.
With the help of Silas, whom I regard as a faithful brother, I have written to you briefly, encouraging you and testifying that this is the true grace of God. Stand fast in it.
But the angel said to her, “Do not be afraid, Mary; you have found favor with God.
There are pictures which we attach to the wall which is good to look at.
Suppose a brother or sister is without clothes and daily food.
One Sabbath, when Jesus went to eat in the house of a prominent Pharisee, he was being carefully watched.
The books aren’t put away neatly yet
lake
He came to Jesus at night and said, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from God. For no one could perform the signs you are doing if God were not with him.”
Don’t you remember that when I was with you I used to tell you these things?
roost, perch as a bird or chicken
As for the person, he felt his house shake when he slashed the python.
eat a lot
The pig is the object of concern when someone has died.
Jesus answered them, “Destroy this temple, and I will raise it again in three days.”
The waterpole is cracked
On arriving there, they gathered the church together and reported all that God had done through them and how he had opened a door of faith to the Gentiles.
We are alive.
If I give all I possess to the poor and give over my body to hardship that I may boast, but do not have love, I gain nothing.
Mother returned home first because her breasts were already engorged with milk.
bite off
return, turn back
The person with good character: He isn’t a liar, doesn’t gossip, is afraid to do bad things, and humbles himself.
As Jesus was getting into the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed begged to go with him.
Secondary forest with high, large trees
grab
Flower
See to it that you do not refuse him who speaks. If they did not escape when they refused him who warned them on earth, how much less will we, if we turn away from him who warns us from heaven?
Paul replied, “Brothers, I did not realize that he was the high priest; for it is written: ‘Do not speak evil about the ruler of your people.’”
We split open the pula palm tree which we have notched and then we see many white grubs which are squirming.
Jesus said to them, "Only in his hometown, among his relatives and in his own house is a prophet without honor."
Then I heard a loud voice in heaven say: “Now have come the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of his Messiah. For the accuser of our brothers and sisters, who accuses them before our God day and night, has been hurled down.
As it is written: “I have made you a father of many nations.” He is our father in the sight of God, in whom he believed—the God who gives life to the dead and calls into being things that were not.
soft, spongy core
Then Jesus said to him, “Get up! Pick up your mat and walk.”
dizzy
If the pot is stumbled over it will spill
For it has been granted to you on behalf of Christ not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for him,
Once when Jesus was praying in private and his disciples were with him, he asked them, “Who do the crowds say I am?”
kind of large tree
The bees were surrounding the mosquito net which I had entered.
Be merciful, just as your Father is merciful.
No, the Father himself loves you because you have loved me and have believed that I came from God.
He laid his head on the rock
comb.
Some fell on rocky places, where it did not have much soil. It sprang up quickly, because the soil was shallow.
“You unbelieving and perverse generation,” Jesus replied, “how long shall I stay with you? How long shall I put up with you? Bring the boy here to me.”
The Jews said to one another, "Where does this man intend to go that we cannot find him? Will he go where our people live scattered among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks?
To stuff oneself with food
Just go around because there is a log in the way.
consistent
If there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “Don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
If we claim we have not sinned, we make him out to be a liar and his word has no place in our lives.
We trample the rice stems which have been harvested so that the grains of rice can be dried in the sun.
bone
already
to bend, be bent
shake back and forth
As for the child whose body is excessively hot, the heat radiates. When we touch our hand to his body it is hot.
wedding feast
To climb a mountain
Greet Tryphena and Tryphosa, those women who work hard in the Lord. Greet my dear friend Persis, another woman who has worked very hard in the Lord.
kind of white rice having large grains
When he has done this, then the Son himself will be made subject to him who put everything under him, so that God may be all in all.
We’ll pound the rice together.
The Pharisees challenged him, “Here you are, appearing as your own witness; your testimony is not valid.”
you who have received the law that was given through angels but have not obeyed it.”
When he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been slain because of the word of God and the testimony they had maintained.
A person who cuts individual strands of baluy or lunrun grass, uses it to make a pouch in which to put seed rice.
Any kind of taro leaves
He took Peter, James and John along with him, and he began to be deeply distressed and troubled.
reject something as being too small or insufficient
When he met us at Assos, we took him aboard and went on to Mitylene.
shredded abaca fiber (hemp)
Then Paul answered, “Why are you weeping and breaking my heart? I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
You see that a person is justified by what he does and not by faith alone.
wear something strapped around the waist such as a bolo
While they were reclining at the table eating, he said, "I tell you the truth, one of you will betray me--one who is eating with me."
A long-waisted black and white blouse
Rash, such as from heat
Now I rejoice in what was suffered for you, and I fill up in my flesh what is still lacking in regard to Christ's afflictions, for the sake of his body, which is the church.
When a dog sits, all of his feet touch (are propped on??) the ground
a warning
plead
To make notches.
one strand
He then brought them out and asked, "Sirs, what must I do to be saved?"
Whether it is high or short, thick or thin, if it is in the yard and surrounds a house or a yard, it is called a fense.
While people are saying, “Peace and safety,” destruction will come on them suddenly, as labor pains on a pregnant woman, and they will not escape.
I am not saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be content whatever the circumstances.
When they saw the courage of Peter and John and realized that they were unschooled, ordinary men, they were astonished and they took note that these men had been with Jesus.
small green parrot with an aqua blue head
To become thin
I’ll pour some of your water [into my water tube].
But the widow who lives for pleasure is dead even while she lives.
The sixth angel sounded his trumpet, and I heard a voice coming from the horns of the golden altar that is before God
The spines of the cococut [leaf] are what are used to make a stick broom.
call one’s dog
float on the surface, as of a dead fish
Breath
I was a stranger and you did not invite me in, I needed clothes and you did not clothe me, I was sick and in prison and you did not look after me.’
Branch of a tree;
Leaning back against Jesus, he asked him, "Lord, who is it?"
skin an animal, peel a fruit or vegetable
Above all, love each other deeply, because love covers over a multitude of sins.
shingle
And having disarmed the powers and authorities, he made a public spectacle of them, triumphing over them by the cross.
The other places which have been reached by the sun have nothing to eat because their ground is dry.
Try to resussicate or revive someone such as a person who has fainted or is dying.
Spill out
"Still another said, 'I just got married, so I can't come.
Whenever it seizes him, it throws him to the ground. He foams at the mouth, gnashes his teeth and becomes rigid. I asked your disciples to drive out the spirit, but they could not."
The dog who is a nursing mother, when she playfully bites her offspring, she plays with her offspring. She gently bites her offspring.
There he was transfigured before them. His face shone like the sun, and his clothes became as white as the light.
As for a cock, what is used as a treatment is the hair of a weasel which is used to smoke the chicken so that it will fight fiercely.
We will hurry up to bathe at the pool because there are no people yet.
Push the fishhook through to the other side of his thumb.3To penetrate through, as a pain which goes through one's body from one side to another.
As he looked at the writing, he looked at it carefully so that [the meaning] would not be distorted.
So they passed by Mysia and went down to Troas.
This all happened at Bethany on the other side of the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
until we all reach unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God and become mature, attaining to the whole measure of the fullness of Christ.
To be benighted
become bent or dented, as metal
(John testified concerning him. He cried out, saying, “This was he of whom I said, ‘He who comes after me has surpassed me because he was before me.’”)
And the child grew and became strong; he was filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was on him.
Which is easier: to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’?
But they found out about it and fled to the Lycaonian cities of Lystra and Derbe and to the surrounding country,
And now what are you waiting for? Get up, be baptized and wash your sins away, calling on his name.'
Instead, they had some points of dispute with him about their own religion and about a dead man named Jesus who Paul claimed was alive.
If there is thin material, we can see through it because the light goes through it.
When he saw that this met with approval among the Jews, he proceeded to seize Peter also. This happened during the Festival of Unleavened Bread.
I found that the accusation had to do with questions about their law, but there was no charge against him that deserved death or imprisonment.
To tell something to someone
The cat has white hairs.
Someone told him, “Your mother and brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.”
He looked up and said, "I see people; they look like trees walking around."
pierce
We put in at Syracuse and stayed there three days.
The king was distressed, but because of his oaths and his dinner guests, he ordered that her request be granted
Much in every way! First of all, the Jews have been entrusted with the very words of God.
in order
Jesus said, "Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing." And they divided up his clothes by casting lots.
rice seedlings springing up far apart
Those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads
Some time later Paul said to Barnabas, “Let us go back and visit the believers in all the towns where we preached the word of the Lord and see how they are doing.”
If you declare with your mouth, “Jesus is Lord,” and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
My cloth backpack is lightweight.
When Herod saw Jesus, he was greatly pleased, because for a long time he had been wanting to see him. From what he had heard about him, he hoped to see him perform some miracle.
For since the creation of the world God’s invisible qualities—his eternal power and divine nature—have been clearly seen, being understood from what has been made, so that people are without excuse.
Against all hope, Abraham in hope believed and so became the father of many nations, just as it had been said to him, “So shall your offspring be.”
For such men are false apostles, deceitful workmen, masquerading as apostles of Christ.
I needed an embroidered blouse.
Tiny switch of pig’s hair worn on tayun.
start eating (because food is ready)
A groove or v-shaped notch as made in a felled or fallen palm tree trunk
We were invited by Vivian to eat lunch
Then I saw another angel flying in midair, and he had the eternal gospel to proclaim to those who live on the earth—to every nation, tribe, language and people.
Which of you, if your son asks for bread, will give him a stone?
He has made us competent as ministers of a new covenant—not of the letter but of the Spirit; for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
So also, the one with two bags of gold gained two more.
Pack to go
Platform above the hearth used for drying wood.
A kind of crayfish having large claws
In a vision he has seen a man named Ananias come and place his hands on him to restore his sight.”
"You don't know what you are asking," Jesus said. "Can you drink the cup I drink or be baptized with the baptism I am baptized with?"
If we meet someone along the trail and their child is crying and we help comfort him, that is an example of treating a child well.
Immediately Jesus made his disciples get into the boat and go on ahead of him to Bethsaida, while he dismissed the crowd.
A destitute person who is always being scolded, when the criticism affects him deeply emotionally so that he can no longer endure it, he will have to react.
scrub floor with coconut husk
unless it was this one thing I shouted as I stood in their presence: 'It is concerning the resurrection of the dead that I am on trial before you today.' "
make a mistake.
I tell you, no! But unless you repent, you too will all perish."
boastful
cover or lid
We plop down as a child who is just learning to walk or an adult who is weak or dizzy.
cleaned area of ground, yard
If someone requests salt, even a little, he doesn't have any.
To miss someone a lot
When they looked up, they saw no one except Jesus.
shake
swing
You have brought these men here, though they have neither robbed temples nor blasphemed our goddess.
If my son marries, his wife is my daughter-in-law.
If there are those which we-excl join together, [they are] each a small unit, [or] a satallite
fin by the fish's ear
But I tell you, do not swear an oath at all: either by heaven, for it is God’s throne;  or by the earth, for it is his footstool; or by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the Great King.
By faith the people passed through the Red Sea as on dry land; but when the Egyptians tried to do so, they were drowned.
He/she doesn’t stop
Afterward Jesus appeared again to his disciples, by the Sea of Galilee. It happened this way:
Have you been thinking all along that we have been defending ourselves to you? We have been speaking in the sight of God as those in Christ; and everything we do, dear friends, is for your strengthening.
Wives, submit to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
Lansones
When the water recedes, there is still water; it returns to its original body [of water].
furry stemmed and leafed tree.
To rinse mouth
give
In your struggle against sin, you have not yet resisted to the point of shedding your blood.
To keep for oneself
The person who is vigorous, is strong in walking.
When a child walks as he/she is playing and lifts his other foot above his/her waist, [his/her] legs and thighs are also spread apart.
Neighbor
Scornful term of address for a woman.
There is a tarp which was used as a cap for Ena's house.
lazy
Jesus asked the Pharisees and experts in the law, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath or not?"
you
He said to them, "Do you bring in a lamp to put it under a bowl or a bed? Instead, don't you put it on its stand?
If the cotton loosens (on the loom), it can’t be done.
Cracking sound
The other guests began to say among themselves, “Who is this who even forgives sins?”
First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is being reported all over the world.
nara tree
because when Melchizedek met Abraham, Levi was still in the body of his ancestor.
Before this faith came, we were held prisoners by the law, locked up until faith should be revealed.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly as you teach and admonish one another with all wisdom, and as you sing psalms, hymns and spiritual songs with gratitude in your hearts to God.
Jesus answered, "I tell you the truth, you are looking for me, not because you saw miraculous signs but because you ate the loaves and had your fill.
Someone in the crowd said to him, "Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me."
To continue with something
I am going to send you what my Father has promised; but stay in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high."
I took the camote leaves together with the sugarcane and planted them around the root of a stump.
They will quickly succumb to death because they are always bowing their heads.
Some time ago when I was still a child, I had an ailment called alap-ap but I cured it with the plant kapigsula which grows on the beach.
To be alive.
For in Christ all the fullness of the Deity lives in bodily form,
Do not deceive yourselves. If any one of you thinks he is wise by the standards of this age, he should become a "fool" so that he may become wise.
Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times and in every way. The Lord be with all of you.
And the scripture was fulfilled that says, "Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness," and he was called God's friend.
With his wife’s full knowledge he kept back part of the money for himself, but brought the rest and put it at the apostles’ feet.
bend in river or road.
"On one of these journeys I was going to Damascus with the authority and commission of the chief priests.
An angel of the Lord appeared to them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified.
black
Azor the father of Zadok, Zadok the father of Akim, Akim the father of Elihud,
His master replied, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You have been faithful with a few things; I will put you in charge of many things. Come and share your master’s happiness!’
Even though the people knew that I was the owner of those plants, they totally cut down [all] the bamboo which I had planted.
Many women were there, watching from a distance. They had followed Jesus from Galilee to care for his needs.
To take something or someone back
When those tending the pigs saw what had happened, they ran off and reported this in the town and countryside,
finish
held up
We are slow/procrastinate about ?? waing up because we don't feel like getting up.
flourish
keep a store
As you know, we consider blessed those who have persevered. You have heard of Job's perseverance and have seen what the Lord finally brought about. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy.
perform activity with hands
Those who are in the realm of the flesh cannot please God.
However, as it is written: "No eye has seen, no ear has heard, no mind has conceived what God has prepared for those who love him" --
Then the chief priests and the Pharisees called a meeting of the Sanhedrin.
"Who are you?" they asked.
But you have an anointing from the Holy One, and all of you know the truth.
He’s covering [his] head with a banana leaf.
What shall we do now?
wooden bar used in weaving
We ought therefore to show hospitality to such men so that we may work together for the truth.
to throw away.
The younger one said to his father, 'Father, give me my share of the estate.' So he divided his property between them.
Why don’t they dig camotes?
to smile or laugh with one's mouth closed, not showing teeth
“Now they know that everything you have given me comes from you.”
To experience cold
and saying, “You who are going to destroy the temple and build it in three days, save yourself! Come down from the cross, if you are the Son of God!”
an
stink bug.
Correct fit
to show mercy to our ancestors and to remember his holy covenant,
How smelly are your pinworms
You too should be on your guard against him, because he strongly opposed our message.
Do not repay anyone evil for evil. Be careful to do what is right in the eyes of everybody.
The first thing Andrew did was to find his brother Simon and tell him, “We have found the Messiah” (that is, the Christ).
He writes the same way in all his letters, speaking in them of these matters. His letters contain some things that are hard to understand, which ignorant and unstable people distort, as they do the other Scriptures, to their own destruction.
Butterfly; moth
Who serves as a soldier at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat its grapes? Who tends a flock and does not drink the milk?
The second angel sounded his trumpet, and something like a huge mountain, all ablaze, was thrown into the sea. A third of the sea turned into blood,
the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
To itch
A kind of large white camote with firm texture.
and he took it and ate it in their presence.
to run out of patience with someone
So I made up my mind that I would not make another painful visit to you.
Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, To God's elect, strangers in the world, scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia,
because judgment without mercy will be shown to anyone who has not been merciful. Mercy triumphs over judgment!
But I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all men to myself."
head louse
Simon's mother-in-law was in bed with a fever, and they told Jesus about her.
When the boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
There is a lot of dust when there are many vehicles which pass by on the road that is not cemented.
"Show me a denarius. Whose portrait and inscription are on it?"
busy
pole for a raft
As has just been said: “Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts as you did in the rebellion.”
I’ll lie apart from the others.
yellow
bounce in time to music.
biting
Still other seed fell on good soil. It came up, grew and produced a crop, multiplying thirty, sixty, or even a hundred times."
Mutter under one's breath, grumble
especially
When you come, bring the cloak that I left with Carpus at Troas, and my scrolls, especially the parchments.
And when the centurion, who stood there in front of Jesus, heard his cry and saw how he died, he said, "Surely this man was the Son of God!"
Ever since I was a [smaller] child, I haven't had a mother to attend to me and I had only one item of clothing.
A large herd of pigs was feeding there on the hillside. The demons begged Jesus to let them go into the pigs, and he gave them permission.
coconut ladle, large wooden spoon
About noon, O king, as I was on the road, I saw a light from heaven, brighter than the sun, blazing around me and my companions.
dense, as a forest
Then each of them was given a white robe, and they were told to wait a little longer, until the full number of their fellow servants, their brothers and sisters, were killed just as they had been.
ten
You are looking only on the surface of things. If anyone is confident that he belongs to Christ, he should consider again that we belong to Christ just as much as he
“What should we do then?” the crowd asked.
And I saw an angel coming down out of heaven, having the key to the Abyss and holding in his hand a great chain.
kind of tree fruit, eaten by rats,
A Canaanite woman from that vicinity came to him, crying out, “Lord, Son of David, have mercy on me! My daughter is demon-possessed and suffering terribly.”
The ground is sloping.
I have much to write you, but I do not want to do so with pen and ink.
For if anyone with a weak conscience sees you who have this knowledge eating in an idol's temple, won't he be emboldened to eat what has been sacrificed to idols?
That is why many among you are weak and sick, and a number of you have fallen asleep.
“Unless you people see signs and wonders,” Jesus told him, “you will never believe.”
He will punish those who do not know God and do not obey the gospel of our Lord Jesus.
For the sinful nature desires what is contrary to the Spirit, and the Spirit what is contrary to the sinful nature. They are in conflict with each other, so that you do not do what you want.
After going through Pisidia, they came into Pamphylia,
In any case, I must keep going today and tomorrow and the next day--for surely no prophet can die outside Jerusalem!
wedding
sweep away
fifty
rattan
Pinchers
and among the lampstands was someone "like a son of man," dressed in a robe reaching down to his feet and with a golden sash around his chest.
The disciples left, went into the city and found things just as Jesus had told them. So they prepared the Passover.
He was given power to give breath to the image of the first beast, so that it could speak and cause all who refused to worship the image to be killed.
When the child inches forward, the midwife causes it to accompany her hands.
Cousin
Their bodies will lie in the public square of the great city—which is figuratively called Sodom and Egypt—where also their Lord was crucified.
because they all saw him and were terrified.
a kind of wood
become alienated to the extent of refusing to speak
And in the church God has appointed first of all apostles, second prophets, third teachers, then workers of miracles, also those having gifts of healing, those able to help others, those with gifts of administration, and those speaking in different kinds of tongues.
Tell, relate, as news or an event.
since you are demanding proof that Christ is speaking through me. He is not weak in dealing with you, but is powerful among you.
If we claim to be without sin, we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us.
a seashell
Have pity on
the fibrous covering of a coconut tree or other palm tree
where " 'their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.'
A hundred
word
If someone is stabbed by a raider, the spear will pierce and go through [the body].
Then will appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven. And then all the peoples of the earth will mourn when they see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.
They were seared by the intense heat and they cursed the name of God, who had control over these plagues, but they refused to repent and glorify him.
Snug
To swim (as an eel)
Pain or lump in the thigh joint.
But these men blaspheme in matters they do not understand. They are like brute beasts, creatures of instinct, born only to be caught and destroyed, and like beasts they too will perish.
rush someone; emphasize
paper wasp.
I myself am convinced, my brothers, that you yourselves are full of goodness, complete in knowledge and competent to instruct one another.
Then Jesus said to them, "Don't you understand this parable? How then will you understand any parable?
overtaken by darkness
leap up and over
to leave home intending to return the same or next day
Hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky. How is it that you don't know how to interpret this present time?
"Now I know that none of you among whom I have gone about preaching the kingdom will ever see me again.
They were being crushed because it was a narrow place.
But I am sending the brothers in order that our boasting about you in this matter should not prove hollow, but that you may be ready, as I said you would be.
Raw, uncooked, unripe.
“Why wasn’t this perfume sold and the money given to the poor? It was worth a year’s wages.”
tender (as beans)
block
When Jesus entered the synagogue leader’s house and saw the noisy crowd and people playing pipes,
the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,
The whole city was aroused, and the people came running from all directions. Seizing Paul, they dragged him from the temple, and immediately the gates were shut.
spine, vertebrae
But if there is a means of defense, we who are living there won't feel insecure because our living situation will be secure.
When he would not be dissuaded, we gave up and said, “The Lord’s will be done.”
So they signaled their partners in the other boat to come and help them, and they came and filled both boats so full that they began to sink.
Young men, in the same way be submissive to those who are older. All of you, clothe yourselves with humility
If our breath is soft, we will cry when we see someone who has been wounded because we pity/have compassion on them.
heel
The man left his wife and four children. And now, he has abandoned his wife and children
But these days, cassava is now being used to make agkud.
I refuse to have anything to do with you.
“But they will never follow a stranger; in fact, they will run away from him because they do not recognize a stranger’s voice.”
see
What I am carrying suspended is lightweight.
They were pleased to do it, and indeed they owe it to them. For if the Gentiles have shared in the Jews' spiritual blessings, they owe it to the Jews to share with them their material blessings.
A good man brings good things out of the good stored up in him, and an evil man brings evil things out of the evil stored up in him.
The [piece of] wood which is a lever, that is the thing used for leverage is put beneath [the log which one intends to move]
The person who was given responsibility to feed the pig did not consent to give the half of the piglets to the owner.
It was Preparation Day (that is, the day before the Sabbath). So as evening approached, Joseph of Arimathea, a prominent member of the Council, who was himself waiting for the kingdom of God, went boldly to Pilate and asked for Jesus' body.
‘The Lord said to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet.”’
The great dragon was hurled down—that ancient serpent called the devil, or Satan, who leads the whole world astray. He was hurled to the earth, and his angels with him.
A person makes wood shavings so that he can ignite them with a match.
I tell you the truth, anyone who will not receive the kingdom of God like a little child will never enter it."
When we look at the date of a month, we need to reserve a time when nothing conflicts so that the gathering together will happen.
I have met him
kind of palm tree
You finally purchased the axe because its price was reduced.
Lung.
For you, brothers, became imitators of God's churches in Judea, which are in Christ Jesus: You suffered from your own countrymen the same things those churches suffered from the Jews,
Also before the throne there was what looked like a sea of glass, clear as crystal.
When the other servants saw what had happened, they were outraged and went and told their master everything that had happened.
wide clearing
to go free, go outside
pluck with a pick or finger
hold hands, lead by holding someone's hand
cut the edge of a log
Boundary
Do not destroy the work of God for the sake of food. All food is clean, but it is wrong for a man to eat anything that causes someone else to stumble.
If it is dry season and the sunny days without rain are long, the soil splits open and cracks.
Bite off [the tails] of the shrimps.
Do everything in love.
grow or develop
The disciples did not understand any of this. Its meaning was hidden from them, and they did not know what he was talking about.
If we go downstream by raft then we beach our raft where the water is calm and we don't beach it where at rapids because our raft will be swept away by the current. Our raft will be carried by the current if we beach our craft at the rapids.
moldy with grey, fuzzy mold
A person whose eye gets something in it cannot open his eye.
When you have become trained, you have strength and it is easy for you because you have become accustomed [to the work].
With eyes full of adultery, they never stop sinning; they seduce the unstable; they are experts in greed--an accursed brood!
The second one married the widow, but he also died, leaving no child. It was the same with the third.
Again the Jews picked up stones to stone him,
the
The child who nurses and doesn't burp, it will happen to vomit up the milk.
to slap
guarantee
What will we do since it keeps on raining?
Armband, used as a charm.
Jesus went on to say, “In a little while you will see me no more, and then after a little while you will see me.”
One of you will say to me: “Then why does God still blame us? For who is able to resist his will?”
fly up and over the earth
Have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness, but rather expose them.
Splinter
dizzy
The one who will claim the head is the one who carried the pig on his back.
Now we who have believed enter that rest, just as God has said, "So I declared on oath in my anger, 'They shall never enter my rest.' "
I have not coveted anyone's silver or gold or clothing.
“Be careful,” Jesus said to them. “Be on your guard against the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
I’ll let the camotes leaf out.
To assume
Jesus left the synagogue and went to the home of Simon. Now Simon’s mother-in-law was suffering from a high fever, and they asked Jesus to help her.
behave in such a way as to upset others
Brothers, we do not want you to be ignorant about those who fall asleep, or to grieve like the rest of men, who have no hope.
The person, [he] is repeatedly carrying wood on his shoulders to use for building a fire.
welcome
to widen, press apart
The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.
A belt with bells and shells
If, however, I am guilty of doing anything deserving death, I do not refuse to die. But if the charges brought against me by these Jews are not true, no one has the right to hand me over to them. I appeal to Caesar!"
In Hades, where he was in torment, he looked up and saw Abraham far away, with Lazarus by his side.
That evening after sunset the people brought to Jesus all the sick and demonpossessed.
The thunder was
A leaf chewed with betel nut
He said this to show the kind of death he was going to die.
Presence of evil spirits at death feast
He ran away with the girl.
A kind of bird about the size of a crow
Therefore, there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus,
spark
The Son of Man will go just as it is written about him. But woe to that man who betrays the Son of Man! It would be better for him if he had not been born.”
become unconscious; coma
When he opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
And if a revelation comes to someone who is sitting down, the first speaker should stop.
Canoe.
We help a weak person by holding [his/her] hand so that [he/she] will gain the ability to walk so that [he/she] will be able to become ambulatory.
If it is soft and flexible, it will not crack.
To intentionally make an impression with some object.
For everyone who asks receives; he who seeks finds; and to him who knocks, the door will be opened.
If your brother or sister sins, go and point out their fault, just between the two of you. If they listen to you, you have won them over.
Then the angel said to me, “Write this: Blessed are those who are invited to the wedding supper of the Lamb!” And he added, “These are the true words of God.”
If the baby in the abdomen has been properly positioned ahead of time, the mother will have it easier when she gives birth.
A kind of breadfruit
Grater
splash,
squeeze out between two hard surfaces, as sugarcane juice or lice nits from hair
Jesus replied, “And why do you break the command of God for the sake of your tradition?
I want men everywhere to lift up holy hands in prayer, without anger or disputing.
tendons
hush up a crying baby at night.
If he scoots, it is just one short motion.
sniffle.
But the man who has settled the matter in his own mind, who is under no compulsion but has control over his own will, and who has made up his mind not to marry the virgin—this man also does the right thing.
A kind of short woman’s bolo.
When we give a warning signal, we pay attention to whether there are people -- that is when those who are suspected to be raiders no step on sticks [as they prowl]. We say, “rrrrrr”.
get up
Share with God's people who are in need. Practice hospitality.
for something to be broken loose from something else such as blood clots
The God of the people of Israel chose our ancestors; he made the people prosper during their stay in Egypt; with mighty power he led them out of that country;
and especially so because you are well acquainted with all the Jewish customs and controversies. Therefore, I beg you to listen to me patiently.
“I have other sheep that are not of this sheep pen. I must bring them also. They too will listen to my voice, and there shall be one flock and one shepherd.”
play at work without taking it seriously
“Believe me when I say that I am in the Father and the Father is in me; or at least believe on the evidence of the works themselves.”
arrow
Again, if the trumpet does not sound a clear call, who will get ready for battle?
He/she will quit eating.
yours
relationship between siblings
I emptied the trap.
While Jesus was in one of the towns, a man came along who was covered with leprosy. When he saw Jesus, he fell with his face to the ground and begged him, “Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean.”
beat or whip.
Whoever has ears, let them hear.”
throw
arrive at the same time
Thus the people were divided because of Jesus.
but glory, honor and peace for everyone who does good: first for the Jew, then for the Gentile.
Ancestor
worship
This ritual to remove a charm, it is [performed by] sacrificing to the spirits
story song
stage of rice growth (about 2 feet high)
take a pinch of something
The disciples did so, and everyone sat down.
Besides everything else, I face daily the pressure of my concern for all the churches.
If we have one girl offspring, we will present her to her paternal grandparents.
dwarf
backbite
At that time his voice shook the earth, but now he has promised, "Once more I will shake not only the earth but also the heavens."
They examined me and wanted to release me, because I was not guilty of any crime deserving death.
anything
famine, hunger season
If we eat something that still has a bone, we bite into and chew [the flesh] off until it is stripped
include
and declared, “This fellow said, ‘I am able to destroy the temple of God and rebuild it in three days.’”
I have come into the world as a light, so that no one who believes in me should stay in darkness.
wash hands or dishes
sediment free
I said, “So how many hundred [pesos] is your horse?”
There is a pattern that is parallel to one's body and there is a pattern that is crosswise to the body.
In the Lord, however, woman is not independent of man, nor is man independent of woman.
cuckoo bird
The student is not above the teacher, but everyone who is fully trained will be like their teacher.
So too, a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the other side.
For goodness sake!
Now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law, so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole world held accountable to God.
When we pick up a lot of mahogany seeds, they are also picked up from the ground because we are picking them up.
Sand from beach.
Do not forget to entertain strangers, for by so doing some people have entertained angels without knowing it.
a small black and white spotted  electric eel
For, as I have often told you before and now say again even with tears, many live as enemies of the cross of Christ.
The guns  were taken as spoils.
to manage or lift something
anyway
The material that was starched became stiff when it dried.
to untie (as shoes or an animal)
strength
There is a person who has a snack of bread and he gets peanut [butter] which he spreads back and forth on it so that it will taste good
We'll be cursed for wasting the rice.
As we passed to the lee of a small island called Cauda, we were hardly able to make the lifeboat secure.
For I will give you words and wisdom that none of your adversaries will be able to resist or contradict.
But Jesus would not entrust himself to them, for he knew all people.
This man, however, did not trace his descent from Levi, yet he collected a tenth from Abraham and blessed him who had the promises.
in holiness and righteousness before him all our days.
to swat
It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God."
Tiny abaca bugs
For sin, seizing the opportunity afforded by the commandment, deceived me, and through the commandment put me to death.
I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven; whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.”
Twin.
fish net
shed, as a skin or soft shell.
“This perfume could have been sold at a high price and the money given to the poor.”
‘Nine hundred gallons of olive oil,’ he replied. The manager told him, ‘Take your bill, sit down quickly, and make it four hundred and fifty.’
For this reason they tried all the more to kill him; not only was he breaking the Sabbath, but he was even calling God his own Father, making himself equal with God.
For many will come in my name, claiming, ‘I am the Messiah,’ and will deceive many.
bold, unabashed
When the cavalry arrived in Caesarea, they delivered the letter to the governor and handed Paul over to him.
selfish person
nonpoisonous leaf used for putting on swellings and aches.
A tree with wide fuzzy leaves
You have let go of the commands of God and are holding on to the traditions of men.
If the word is just daral, it's meaning is different because we are rushing our companion to do something.
If he has done you any wrong or owes you anything, charge it to me.
Narrow passage between two cliffs on the Kabungabungan creek.
feed
I came from the Father and entered the world; now I am leaving the world and going back to the Father."
Brothers and sisters, choose seven men from among you who are known to be full of the Spirit and wisdom. We will turn this responsibility over to them
white skin fungus
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled.
We felt his foot.
distracted
talk or move in one’s sleep
So, because you are lukewarm-- neither hot nor cold--I am about to spit you out of my mouth.
Middle finger.
Herod had been quarreling with the people of Tyre and Sidon; they now joined together and sought an audience with him. Having secured the support of Blastus, the king’s chamberlain, they asked for peace, because they depended on the king’s country for their food supply.
“I baptize you with water for repentance. But after me comes one who is more powerful than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.
to be able to manage the current without being carried away by it
clog
When they had done so, they caught such a large number of fish that their nets began to break.
So he left Judea and went back once more to Galilee.
I do not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters, that I planned many times to come to you (but have been prevented from doing so until now) in order that I might have a harvest among you, just as I have had among the other Gentiles.
The others won't produce ears.
For none of us lives for ourselves alone, and none of us dies for ourselves alone.
If it is possible, as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone.
to be alert and energetic
So you also must be ready, because the Son of Man will come at an hour when you do not expect him.
He rarely shells corn by hand.
floor brace.
When these things begin to take place, stand up and lift up your heads, because your redemption is drawing near."
The apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith!”
suitable
The Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, be crucified and on the third day be raised again.' "
tearful, crying continually
Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother,

long-waisted
He is not the God of the dead, but of the living, for to him all are alive."
move forward slowly
You used to walk in these ways, in the life you once lived.
love song style.
They came to Capernaum. When he was in the house, he asked them, "What were you arguing about on the road?"
"A little yeast works through the whole batch of dough."
headband
the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,
place or put
I’ll return in the future, about two years from now.
But the hand of him who is going to betray me is with mine on the table.
Keyed up as when feeling rushed to leave on a trip
When there are those traveling, we feel rushed as they are leaving.
to have sexual relations
little pollywog
If someone shivers, they begin to have chills.
We roll our eyes under the lids
“How can this be?” Nicodemus asked.
But while everyone was sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat, and went away.
the Spirit, the water and the blood; and the three are in agreement.
One person says, "From where did you transport that seed?" I say, "From Maguimon. They asked for that seed which they will also propagate."
to sit up
But we ought always to thank God for you, brothers and sisters loved by the Lord, because God chose you as firstfruits to be saved through the sanctifying work of the Spirit and through belief in the truth.
He said to them, "When you pray, say: " 'Father, hallowed be your name, your kingdom come.
Tobacco seed
(This was before John was put in prison.)
well-behaved
Cotton-like substance from a plant (kapok)
baby blanket
Dear children, keep yourselves from idols.
During those days men will seek death, but will not find it; they will long to die, but death will elude them.
Onions.
Several throws
big toe
For if those who depend on the law are heirs, faith means nothing and the promise is worthless,
How much more severely do you think a man deserves to be punished who has trampled the Son of God under foot, who has treated as an unholy thing the blood of the covenant that sanctified him, and who has insulted the Spirit of grace?
And he went outside and wept bitterly.
and the stars in the sky fell to earth, as figs drop from a fig tree when shaken by a strong wind.
Her legs were crossing as she was walking
Consequently, faith comes from hearing the message, and the message is heard through the word about Christ.
A lone tree standing
who disobeyed long ago when God waited patiently in the days of Noah while the ark was being built. In it only a few people, eight in all, were saved through water,
you, then, who teach others, do you not teach yourself? You who preach against stealing, do you steal?
Hole
The cat is spoiled because it is used to eating sardines.
Poor
faint
to make a decision about something; be controlled by someone or something
When they received it, they began to grumble against the landowner.
A person who is afflicted with a fear of people is terrified and must travel to wherever he might go.
To intercept.
What we sew won’t finished.
At once he began to preach in the synagogues that Jesus is the Son of God.
What do you think? There was a man who had two sons. He went to the first and said, ‘Son, go and work today in the vineyard.’
Nevertheless, I have a few things against you: You have people there who hold to the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to entice the Israelites to sin by eating food sacrificed to idols and by committing sexual immorality.
We know also that the Son of God has come and has given us understanding, so that we may know him who is true. And we are in him who is true--even in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life.
If a person has a concern and then his breath is helped, his brow relaxes.
type of tree with cotton-like pods
Jesus said to them, “Truly I tell you, at the renewal of all things, when the Son of Man sits on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
To ascend.
He throws a ball.
If anyone does not obey our instruction in this letter, take special note of him. Do not associate with him, in order that he may feel ashamed.
When everyone feels hurt, that is [the context where] they will be reconciled to one another. You hugged each other because you were reconciled
When there are many grubs which are making a whispering noise, it lets us know that the [grubs] in the palm trunk have broken through [to each other] knotched palm.
The money earned from his bamboo was used up by the person whom he had entrusted
so that the man of God may be thoroughly equipped for every good work.
pinworm
Lydda was near Joppa; so when the disciples heard that Peter was in Lydda, they sent two men to him and urged him, “Please come at once!”
There is no one to watch her children so she won't be able to dig camotes.
Therefore, if what I eat causes my brother to fall into sin, I will never eat meat again, so that I will not cause him to fall
boil
keeping a clear conscience, so that those who speak maliciously against your good behavior in Christ may be ashamed of their slander.
His mother said to the servants, “Do whatever he tells you.”
outlet where a side stream rejoins the main river
When Mary heard this, she got up quickly and went to him.
Now a man named Lazarus was sick. He was from Bethany, the village of Mary and her sister Martha.
Pilate answered, "What I have written, I have written."
travel across a mountain slope
But we sailed from Philippi after the Festival of Unleavened Bread, and five days later joined the others at Troas, where we stayed seven days.
While he was saying this, a synagogue leader came and knelt before him and said, “My daughter has just died. But come and put your hand on her, and she will live.”
This is a trustworthy saying. And I want you to stress these things, so that those who have trusted in God may be careful to devote themselves to doing what is good. These things are excellent and profitable for everyone.
bamboo flute.
To peel
Whoever believes in me, as the Scripture has said, streams of living water will flow from within him."
blanket
stop
The music of harpists and musicians, flute players and trumpeters, will never be heard in you again. No workman of any trade will ever be found in you again. The sound of a millstone will never be heard in you again.
The honey bees patiukan, tamo-ing tamusan and the wasps tabu-uan, lapinid, baga-baga, all have grubs. Those are their offspring.
Sore on bottom of foot
to twist
shirt, blouse
No lie was found in their mouths; they are blameless.
father
Fruit of the polì tree, small and round with leathery skin.
One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues came and said to me, "Come, I will show you the bride, the wife of the Lamb."
For Moses said, 'Honor your father and your mother,' and, 'Anyone who curses his father or mother must be put to death.'
The fields are close to each other but there is a space between [them].
The lagtang vine, its fruit is used to poison the banak fish.
to distribute evenly, as to sow a field so the seed is spread throughout
Comb handle
The promise is for you and your children and for all who are far off—for all whom the Lord our God will call.”
He began to speak boldly in the synagogue. When Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they invited him to their home and explained to him the way of God more adequately.
Once again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was let down into the lake and caught all kinds of fish.
So, because Jesus was doing these things on the Sabbath, the Jewish leaders began to persecute him.
But they did not understand what this meant. It was hidden from them, so that they did not grasp it, and they were afraid to ask him about it.
At that time Mary got ready and hurried to a town in the hill country of Judea,
twitch, as in the eye or cheek
Two women will be grinding grain together; one will be taken and the other left.”
He at once took some officers and soldiers and ran down to the crowd. When the rioters saw the commander and his soldiers, they stopped beating Paul.
Woven rattan sieve placed in the mouth of a bamboo lime container
but the people of Israel, who pursued the law as the way of righteousness, have not attained their goal.
They will perish, but you remain; they will all wear out like a garment.
bamboo stick
I gave the pencil to Asat.
A person whose mouth is wide open as he laughs because he is very amused continually happens to grin.
"Suppose one of you wants to build a tower. Will he not first sit down and estimate the cost to see if he has enough money to complete it?
For we are God's fellow workers; you are God's field, God's building.
When Jesus saw him lying there and learned that he had been in this condition for a long time, he asked him, “Do you want to get well?”
When they could not find a way to do this because of the crowd, they went up on the roof and lowered him on his mat through the tiles into the middle of the crowd, right in front of Jesus.
The horse which is being treated, with something to make him fierce, he becomes like the creatures which are likewise fierce.
Wind the beads around your neck
On hearing this, Jesus said to them, "It is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick. I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners."
So neither the one who plants nor the one who waters is anything, but only God, who makes things grow.
Finally I checked out the fish trap and it was was filled with small fish which were caught in the fish trap.
Wrap around securely when you tie it up.
" 'Sir,' the servant said, 'what you ordered has been done, but there is still room.'
Bushy (hair); spread out (grains, feathers)
One day Jesus was praying in a certain place. When he finished, one of his disciples said to him, "Lord, teach us to pray, just as John taught his disciples."
thousand
it’s difficult for us
defecate
to succeed, accomplish
Something used as a remedy.
But I will show you whom you should fear: Fear him who, after the killing of the body, has power to throw you into hell. Yes, I tell you, fear him.
To hunker down (hiding)
Then he said to them, "Whoever welcomes this little child in my name welcomes me; and whoever welcomes me welcomes the one who sent me. For he who is least among you all--he is the greatest."
occupy or pay sole attention to something
Yesterday
Judge for yourselves: Is it proper for a woman to pray to God with her head uncovered?
Pray that I may be rescued from the unbelievers in Judea and that my service in Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints there,
Afterward, as you know, when he wanted to inherit this blessing, he was rejected. He could bring about no change of mind, though he sought the blessing with tears.
I fast twice a week and give a tenth of all I get.’
When Moses heard this, he fled to Midian, where he settled as a foreigner and had two sons.
For when there is a change of the priesthood, there must also be a change of the law.
For John baptized with water, but in a few days you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.”
Kind of climbing bamboo used for weaving.
To this end I labor, struggling with all his energy, which so powerfully works in me.
gun
Your dark blue umbrella which you forgot to retrieve from another house, it has been neglected That is [the meaning of] a fixed object ???, it isn't paid attention to. It becomes permanently [forgotten].
eat well or eat a lot
But as surely as God is faithful, our message to you is not "Yes" and "No."
mouse.
To pack up
After spending eight or ten days with them, Festus went down to Caesarea. The next day he convened the court and ordered that Paul be brought before him.
The person who has a kuglung instrument gets a string made from the philidendra.
‘These people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me.
You know we never used flattery, nor did we put on a mask to cover up greed—God is our witness.
Even with these words, they had difficulty keeping the crowd from sacrificing to them.
Immediately one of them ran and got a sponge. He filled it with wine vinegar, put it on a staff, and offered it to Jesus to drink.
When the centurion heard this, he went to the commander and reported it. "What are you going to do?" he asked. "This man is a Roman citizen."
jump
Then the high priest and all his associates, who were members of the party of the Sadducees, were filled with jealousy.
What then shall we say? Is God unjust? Not at all!
For I am afraid that when I come I may not find you as I want you to be, and you may not find me as you want me to be. I fear that there may be discord, jealousy, fits of rage, selfish ambition, slander, gossip, arrogance and disorder.
We are not going too far in our boasting, as would be the case if we had not come to you, for we did get as far as you with the gospel of Christ.
For he says, “In the time of my favor I heard you, and in the day of salvation I helped you.” I tell you, now is the time of God’s favor, now is the day of salvation.
To continue on with something as though it had not been interrupted
Some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to Jesus, "Teacher, rebuke your disciples!"
And pray that we may be delivered from wicked and evil people, for not everyone has faith.
The inside of this building is also called spacious.
I would like every one of you to speak in tongues, but I would rather have you prophesy. The one who prophesies is greater than the one who speaks in tongues, unless someone interprets, so that the church may be edified.
God did not reject his people, whom he foreknew. Don’t you know what Scripture says in the passage about Elijah—how he appealed to God against Israel:
If Jesus just barely blew.
Binding on a bolo scabbard.
Top leader
He will not quarrel or cry out; no one will hear his voice in the streets.
The debris is removed from a mat when a woman shakes it.
He who overcomes will, like them, be dressed in white. I will never blot out his name from the book of life, but will acknowledge his name before my Father and his angels.
[I've] had it with this child who is always crying who has a hollowed-out mouth!
“Is this your son?” they asked. “Is this the one you say was born blind? How is it that now he can see?”
How can you believe since you accept glory from one another but do not seek the glory that comes from the only God?
thing or something
tip over
obese
For since in the wisdom of God the world through its wisdom did not know him, God was pleased through the foolishness of what was preached to save those who believe.
sarong, skirt
You don’t know how to pound rice well
Rude, unmannerly, vulgar girl.
to be orphaned by at least one parent
For we know, brothers and sisters loved by God, that he has chosen you,
“Their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness.”
Then what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
Her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown her great mercy, and they shared her joy.
If there are those in some village who are under someone's authority, it's as though they are all his subjects.
Even from your own number men will arise and distort the truth in order to draw away disciples after them.
hummingbird
So he traveled throughout Galilee, preaching in their synagogues and driving out demons.
meet
But in the days when the seventh angel is about to sound his trumpet, the mystery of God will be accomplished, just as he announced to his servants the prophets.”
The two beds are uneven because they aren't the same size.
You move forward and I’ll move back a bit
As for a child who is mute, he will be mute from [the time that] he is born until he has become old
break and fall over
So when the crowd had gathered, Pilate asked them, “Which one do you want me to release to you: Jesus Barabbas, or Jesus who is called the Messiah?”
It was Preparation Day, and the Sabbath was about to begin.
God raised him from the dead so that he will never be subject to decay. As God has said, ‘I will give you the holy and sure blessings promised to David.’
They looked for a way to arrest him, but they were afraid of the crowd because the people held that he was a prophet.
A bala-an is a small bamboo container in which edible water creatures are put.
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth,
Whoever does not take up their cross and follow me is not worthy of me.
From now on there will be five in one family divided against each other, three against two and two against three.
It doesn't work to sift (lit. if one sifts) something wet because it would stick.
flood
A kind of bird
Part of certain traps released by the trigger.
Kill, murdered.
On his arrival, Jesus found that Lazarus had already been in the tomb for four days.
squirrel
When ghosts try to scare us, at first they say, "Mmm." After that, they make things drop in front of us.
When he looks at me, he sees the one who sent me.
Afternoon
We encourage the one singing love songs [by saying], “Continue singing love songs.”
The seventh angel poured out his bowl into the air, and out of the temple came a loud voice from the throne, saying, "It is done!"
gluttonous
And if by grace, then it cannot be based on works; if it were, grace would no longer be grace.
so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed. And a sword will pierce your own soul too.”
You yourselves are our letter, written on our hearts, known and read by everyone.
finger ring
" 'Go to this people and say, "You will be ever hearing but never understanding; you will be ever seeing but never perceiving."
take someone's place
weave with overlapping strands, as in fish traps
suffer intense but endurable pain
during the high-priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John son of Zechariah in the wilderness.
I tell you the truth, anyone who gives you a cup of water in my name because you belong to Christ will certainly not lose his reward.
hospitable
Stand firm then, with the belt of truth buckled around your waist, with the breastplate of righteousness in place,
Behave
If we are being called to account today for an act of kindness shown to a man who was lame and are being asked how he was healed,
That same day the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to him with a question.
To not be still a minute
Don't
It will be a cause of much embarrassment to us.
For Titus not only welcomed our appeal, but he is coming to you with much enthusiasm and on his own initiative.
The rain will obliterate the footprints.
I ask then: Did God reject his people? By no means! I am an Israelite myself, a descendant of Abraham, from the tribe of Benjamin.
This is why I speak to them in parables: “Though seeing, they do not see; though hearing, they do not hear or understand.
scrape
tiptoe.
share
expensive
Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in Christ.
If there is a jeep which is broken down which needs to be taken to a shop for repair, they also have it towed by another jeep.
And to whom did God swear that they would never enter his rest if not to those who disobeyed?
dry meat or fruit
If you have been caught by darkness, it will be difficult for you to arrive at your dwelling place because where you travel is dark.
But if you do marry, you have not sinned; and if a virgin marries, she has not sinned. But those who marry will face many troubles in this life, and I want to spare you this.
Put your younger sibling into the cooking pot.
So he drove them off.
but the worries of this life, the deceitfulness of wealth and the desires for other things come in and choke the word, making it unfruitful.
But Saul began to destroy the church. Going from house to house, he dragged off both men and women and put them in prison.
He talked and debated with the Hellenistic Jews, but they tried to kill him.
If the leg is in pain, the person will limp when walking and won’t be able to step properly.
If the carabao cannot touch bottom, it will be carried away by the current. But if the carabao can touch bottom, it will manage the current as it crosses the river.
However
Crocodile
Here is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance: Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners—of whom I am the worst.
your
After saying this, he spit on the ground, made some mud with the saliva, and put it on the man’s eyes.
political power
He claims relationships with those who aren't his [real] younger-siblings. He is always paling-around-like-family with us.
ride
Whoever is ashamed of me and my words, the Son of Man will be ashamed of them when he comes in his glory and in the glory of the Father and of the holy angels.
distinct, exaggerated speech, slow
bowl made of coconut shell.
older women as mothers, and younger women as sisters, with absolute purity.
He replied, "This kind can come out only by prayer. "
The jailer called for lights, rushed in and fell trembling before Paul and Silas.
Besides, they get into the habit of being idle and going about from house to house. And not only do they become idlers, but also busybodies who talk nonsense, saying things they ought not to.
persuade
This is said to a new guest who is shy to take very much food: "Eat up!"
Invitation to wrestle playfully
There was a person who was sawing togop wood into boards.
Once more Jesus put his hands on the man's eyes. Then his eyes were opened, his sight was restored, and he saw everything clearly.
Put your things together; they’ll get lost.
Wait a minute
So he called him in and asked him, ‘What is this I hear about you? Give an account of your management, because you cannot be manager any longer.’
I, Paul, write this greeting in my own hand, which is the distinguishing mark in all my letters. This is how I write.
They have become filled with every kind of wickedness, evil, greed and depravity. They are full of envy, murder, strife, deceit and malice. They are gossips,
As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without deeds is dead.
Finish eating up rest of food
a kind of hard wood
confess
To chew betel nut; a larger variety of cultivated betel nut; betel nut container.
pick
The coming of the lawless one will be in accordance with how Satan works. He will use all sorts of displays of power through signs and wonders that serve the lie,
And he will send his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of the heavens to the other.
handle
The very top of the head
be confused or distracted by too many things to see
Give the portion to Brother-in-law.
A greedy person as someone who would eat up leftovers and not think of someone else's needs
There are splotches on the body of a child when he/she is two weeks old from the time of birth. They develop from his/her milk. The splotches just go away when he is older.
The person who dances to the drum waves two pieces of material.
Restrain yourself
completely burn a field
some time ago
But concerning Israel he says, “All day long I have held out my hands to a disobedient and obstinate people.”
When did we see you sick or in prison and go to visit you?’
unobstructed
A person who is slashed, speared, shot with a gun, pierced [by a trap], or steps on sharpened bamboo stakes, all are wounded by that which breaks through the skin.
The third time he said to him, “Simon son of John, do you love me?” Peter was hurt because Jesus asked him the third time, “Do you love me?” He said, “Lord, you know all things; you know that I love you.” Jesus said, “Feed my sheep.”
Matthew, Thomas, James son of Alphaeus, Simon who was called the Zealot,
a person's circumstance
Look! The wages you failed to pay the workmen who mowed your fields are crying out against you. The cries of the harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord Almighty.
blister from friction
I thank God that I speak in tongues more than all of you.
To leave behind in someone's care, especially of a child
suffer
As for the house of a person which was leaning due to a strong wind, it was braced by its owner so that his house would not fall over.
wind
obtain viand
For the creation waits in eager expectation for the children of God to be revealed.
Skinny hips!
Powder/dust from woodboring insects
padded hips of a monkey
to be dispirited, weak, or depressed
fall flat on one’s face on the ground.
When the sun goes down, darkness covers the earth.
slash with a bolo
“I have brought you glory on earth by finishing the work you gave me to do.”
Mery has to detour when she goes to school because there is no shortcut path nearby.
Stop drinking only water, and use a little wine because of your stomach and your frequent illnesses.
Young coconut
"What then will the owner of the vineyard do? He will come and kill those tenants and give the vineyard to others.
Bomb; spray
Because she heard her name mentioned, she discerned that someone had spoken badly about her.
remain undeveloped, as a runt
The people who short-cut from Tagasan travel up the mountain, traverse the summit, and descend as they go downhill to Maambago.
Male pig
face of a person
You were generous toward Maambago.
"Then he said to those standing by, 'Take his mina away from him and give it to the one who has ten minas.'
For to be sure, he was crucified in weakness, yet he lives by God’s power. Likewise, we are weak in him, yet by God’s power we will live with him in our dealing with you.
Then I looked and heard the voice of many angels, numbering thousands upon thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand. They encircled the throne and the living creatures and the elders.
To be chased by an animal (horse or pig) intent on biting
"Tell us, when will these things happen? And what will be the sign that they are all about to be fulfilled?"
Jesus entered Jericho and was passing through.
Hang to one side; be off center, esp. of one's head
To cut grass, clear ground of weeds.
fish eggs
Argumentative person
to lose permanent teeth
A person fenced in the base of the durian tree which was bearing fruit so that no one would have his fruit fall on him.
Then they brought him a demon-possessed man who was blind and mute, and Jesus healed him, so that he could both talk and see.
What I mean is this: One of you says, "I follow Paul"; another, "I follow Apollos"; another, "I follow Cephas "; still another, "I follow Christ."
slip off
Jesus answered, “You would have no power over me if it were not given to you from above. Therefore the one who handed me over to you is guilty of a greater sin.”
The [halves of] the papaya [divided] unevenly.
Therefore anyone who sets aside one of the least of these commands and teaches others accordingly will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever practices and teaches these commands will be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
Third
back away; get out of the way; set aside
To divide in half.
Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;
When the men had hoisted it aboard, they passed ropes under the ship itself to hold it together. Fearing that they would run aground on the sandbars of Syrtis, they lowered the sea anchor and let the ship be driven along.
fruit of a vine used to poison fish
Ram the father of Amminadab, Amminadab the father of Nahshon, Nahshon the father of Salmon,
strain with much effort
And this is what he promised us--even eternal life.
a person who serves as a substitute
What, then, was the purpose of the law? It was added because of transgressions until the Seed to whom the promise referred had come. The law was put into effect through angels by a mediator.
Now the hand of the Lord is against you. You are going to be blind for a time, not even able to see the light of the sun.” Immediately mist and darkness came over him, and he groped about, seeking someone to lead him by the hand.
Mottled rice.
filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through Jesus Christ--to the glory and praise of God.
“If you do not remain in me, you are like a branch that is thrown away and withers; such branches are picked up, thrown into the fire and burned.”
Tiny pollywog
If someone scrapes bamboo with a large knife (bolo), the sound very much sets our teeth on edge.
It’s quite improbable that this centipede will poison anyone.
What I mean, brothers and sisters, is that the time is short. From now on those who have wives should live as if they do not;
What did you get?
Use it for making the hearth.
But everything exposed by the light becomes visible—and everything that is illuminated becomes a light.
Be careful, however, that the exercise of your rights does not become a stumbling block to the weak.
Christmas
(Yes, I also baptized the household of Stephanas; beyond that, I don't remember if I baptized anyone else.)
When I went  to visit [someone's house], I inadvertently arrived at the same time they were eating. I said, “So you are eating.”
Many will follow their shameful ways and will bring the way of truth into disrepute.
To mate with or have sexual relations with someone.
At harvest time he sent a servant to the tenants so they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. But the tenants beat him and sent him away empty-handed.
If for example [there is] a sack of rice, [if] you tell a person, "Divide it in half" he will take half.
own
For God did not give us a spirit of timidity, but a spirit of power, of love and of self-discipline.
payment.
swim underwater
that
wide
The words "once more" indicate the removing of what can be shaken--that is, created things--so that what cannot be shaken may remain.
You say, 'I am rich; I have acquired wealth and do not need a thing.' But you do not realize that you are wretched, pitiful, poor, blind and naked.
put someone in front
It’s only our meeting; don’t you women come along.
Zechariah asked the angel, “How can I be sure of this? I am an old man, and my wife is well along in years.”
and, once made perfect, he became the source of eternal salvation for all who obey him
whispered softly when hunting wild chickens so that they don't fly away
similar to a molar in shape
“You are Israel’s teacher,” said Jesus, “and do you not understand these things?
Shortcut
There was a person who dismantled what wasn't his house and he destroyed the walls.
embrace
Kidney.
I tell you the truth, he who believes has everlasting life.
And pray for us, too, that God may open a door for our message, so that we may proclaim the mystery of Christ, for which I am in chains.
fall head over heels
With many other words he warned them; and he pleaded with them, “Save yourselves from this corrupt generation.”
knowing it was out of envy that the chief priests had handed Jesus over to him.
Guardian of the house ties
When we cross a river, if we cannot locate a shallow place because the water is foaming, we will be swept into deep water.
“I have much more to say to you, more than you can now bear.”
light or brilliance, as from the sun, a lamp, or a flashlight
field used for rice, then camotes, then left idle
"Who are my mother and my brothers?" he asked.
Jesus had compassion on them and touched their eyes. Immediately they received their sight and followed him.
Uncover the rice so it can dry out.
One night the Lord spoke to Paul in a vision: “Do not be afraid; keep on speaking, do not be silent.
But Jesus remained silent. The high priest said to him, “I charge you under oath by the living God: Tell us if you are the Messiah, the Son of God.”
to strangle
cracked
Raider; to go on a raid.
So you are no longer a slave, but God’s child; and since you are his child, God has made you also an heir.
Then the governor’s soldiers took Jesus into the Praetorium and gathered the whole company of soldiers around him.
You are my master/leader; you are my second leader.”
For it doesn't go into his heart but into his stomach, and then out of his body." (In saying this, Jesus declared all foods "clean.")
To be cheated; suffer loss in bargain or exchange.
"He has blinded their eyes and deadened their hearts, so they can neither see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, nor turn-- and I would heal them."
Another disciple said to him, “Lord, first let me go and bury my father.”
Other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the plants, so that they did not bear grain.
"But we have no right to execute anyone," the Jews objected. This happened so that the words Jesus had spoken indicating the kind of death he was going to die would be fulfilled.
And God placed all things under his feet and appointed him to be head over everything for the church,
All these are the beginning of birth pains.
loan
Chin
The inside of a dug-out canoe is hollowed out as it is made.
Night and day we pray most earnestly that we may see you again and supply what is lacking in your faith.
Brothers-in-law doing something together
Do you still not understand? Don’t you remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many basketfuls you gathered?
When he came back, he again found them sleeping, because their eyes were heavy. They did not know what to say to him.
The baby is developing
The wind is getting stronger.
When we were still children in the past, playing was the only thing we knew about.
tropical ulcer
After Jesus had sent the crowd away, he got into the boat and went to the vicinity of Magadan.
Jesus answered, “Very truly I tell you, no one can enter the kingdom of God unless they are born of water and the Spirit.
A hole in a tree or stump in which water gathers, used as a drinking hole by animals and people.
now before the rich man could grab a stick.
A man with leprosy came to him and begged him on his knees, "If you are willing, you can make me clean."
Tree roots used for planting.
Outboard motor
covet
I say this as a concession, not as a command.
I would have liked to keep him with me so that he could take your place in helping me while I am in chains for the gospel.
When a person becomes emaciated, the side of his hip bone protrudes
King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know you do."
I feel upset. (lit. My breath hurts.)
A kind of hardwood tree with small leaves which are used to bathe a baby.
Short
be obstructed
You who stood on a log, slipped off
For you know that we dealt with each of you as a father deals with his own children, encouraging, comforting and urging you to live lives worthy of God, who calls you into his kingdom and glory.
The run or walk of a lizard.
Hole up (as in a stronghold)
Therefore, if you have disputes about such matters, do you ask for a ruling from those whose way of life is scorned in the church?
Cut off
Carry each other's burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ.
After Jesus had finished instructing his twelve disciples, he went on from there to teach and preach in the towns of Galilee.
inappropriate conduct
But our citizenship is in heaven. And we eagerly await a Savior from there, the Lord Jesus Christ,
That is the person who is able to touch the bottom of a deep [pool].
fan, as with a hand fan
Woe to them! They have taken the way of Cain; they have rushed for profit into Balaam's error; they have been destroyed in Korah's rebellion.
Therefore, remember that formerly you who are Gentiles by birth and called “uncircumcised” by those who call themselves “the circumcision” (which is done in the body by human hands)—
To procrastinate; prolong or to be slow to do something.
When the cut field has dried up, finally [the ftrees in] the field are felled.
Good character/patient?? In our place, if he is having great difficulty, he always supresses his feelings and doesn't quickly revenge. He is very patient.
Noodles.
follow closely, walk single file
tie a small camote on a string as a toy.
Then the Pharisees went out and began to plot with the Herodians how they might kill Jesus.
Other
To tie up; dock, as a raft, canoe or ship
"When I returned to Jerusalem and was praying at the temple, I fell into a trance
so that no one could buy or sell unless he had the mark, which is the name of the beast or the number of his name.
But a married man is concerned about the affairs of this world—how he can please his wife—
"Therefore come out from them and be separate, says the Lord. Touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you."
For a horse to rear or stand up on its hind legs.
But since you do not believe what he wrote, how are you going to believe what I say?”
Sloping
extend
Any kind of hole, if it can hold a lot, it is capacious.
To watch, view.
Without weakening in his faith, he faced the fact that his body was as good as dead—since he was about a hundred years old—and that Sarah’s womb was also dead.
play a kobbiung tune.
Live such good lives among the pagans that, though they accuse you of doing wrong, they may see your good deeds and glorify God on the day he visits us.
When a person dies, [he/she] is buried in the ground.
sticky tree fruit
age
sigh from weariness
All they asked was that we should continue to remember the poor, the very thing I had been eager to do all along.
Welcome him in the Lord with great joy, and honor men like him,
shout at the rain
Jesus said, "I am with you for only a short time, and then I go to the one who sent me.
like Sarah, who obeyed Abraham and called him her lord. You are her daughters if you do what is right and do not give way to fear.
We have spoken freely to you, Corinthians, and opened wide our hearts to you.
molar tooth
The Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God. For who among men knows the thoughts of a man except the man's spirit within him? In the same way no one knows the thoughts of God except the Spirit of God.
Heaven must receive him until the time comes for God to restore everything, as he promised long ago through his holy prophets.
You are called foreigners here in the Philippines because you are subjects of another country.
While a large crowd was gathering and people were coming to Jesus from town after town, he told this parable:
for the Mighty One has done great things for me—holy is his name.
The chicken was thrown to the ground.
Jesus took the Twelve aside and told them, “We are going up to Jerusalem, and everything that is written by the prophets about the Son of Man will be fulfilled.
This will be my third visit to you. "Every matter must be established by the testimony of two or three witnesses."
When he was accused by the chief priests and the elders, he gave no answer.
Too far away for someone to travel
Green tobacco (salingsing)
He then began to speak to them in parables: "A man planted a vineyard. He put a wall around it, dug a pit for the winepress and built a watchtower. Then he rented the vineyard to some farmers and went away on a journey.
carried away
"Tell us by what authority you are doing these things," they said. "Who gave you this authority?"
While talking with him, Peter went inside and found a large gathering of people.
If anyone asks you, 'Why are you doing this?' tell him, 'The Lord needs it and will send it back here shortly.' "
Fungal disease of the skin
So he came down at once and welcomed him gladly.
The rest were killed with the sword coming out of the mouth of the rider on the horse, and all the birds gorged themselves on their flesh.
To be cured or treated
If you believe, you will receive whatever you ask for in prayer.”
And forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
When they arrived, they prayed for the new believers there that they might receive the Holy Spirit,
A person who cannot endure weeding his rice field will quickly become frustrated and will stop working before finishing.
One Sabbath Jesus was going through the grainfields, and his disciples began to pick some heads of grain, rub them in their hands and eat the kernels.
daybreak, dawn
The next day, since the commander wanted to find out exactly why Paul was being accused by the Jews, he released him and ordered the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin to assemble. Then he brought Paul and had him stand before them.
There are people who will hide whose purpose is to scare us so that we will be afraid.
Jesus got up and went with him, and so did his disciples.
yet for us there is but one God, the Father, from whom all things came and for whom we live; and there is but one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things came and through whom we live.
no, not, don’t (non-past negative)
A person who is uncouth acts inappropriately is what a person is called who doesn’t have [good] manners.  He just chatters [things] which arent good.
Resemble
to expend great effort
come together
to cook corn, fish, etc., in a bamboo tube
Some of the Pharisees said, “This man is not from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath.” But others asked, “How can a sinner perform such signs?” So they were divided.
I just casually helped.
Joaquin claims the residents of Maambago as his subjects.
Don’t be in physical contact with me because you will catch my illness.
Exhortation
One of the calls of a white-breasted ubun-ubun dove.
Lita told Mery that she would sleep at her [place].
John’s baptism—where did it come from? Was it from heaven, or of human origin?” They discussed it among themselves and said, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will ask, ‘Then why didn’t you believe him?’
Jesus looked directly at them and asked, "Then what is the meaning of that which is written: " 'The stone the builders rejected has become the capstone ' ?
Let me have a bolo on credit.
Center post of a house
To nod head in assent
for her sins are piled up to heaven, and God has remembered her crimes.
Put your trust in the light while you have it, so that you may become sons of light." When he had finished speaking, Jesus left and hid himself from them.
The flesh and bones of the tail of animals or reptiles.
Calling his disciples to him, Jesus said, "I tell you the truth, this poor widow has put more into the treasury than all the others.
We chase and tag our companions.
Nervous talk
As they were coming down the mountain, Jesus instructed them, “Don’t tell anyone what you have seen, until the Son of Man has been raised from the dead.”
At Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion in what was known as the Italian Regiment.
But there were also false prophets among the people, just as there will be false teachers among you. They will secretly introduce destructive heresies, even denying the sovereign Lord who bought them--bringing swift destruction on themselves.
Husbands, love your wives and do not be harsh with them.
Cornelius answered: “Three days ago I was in my house praying at this hour, at three in the afternoon. Suddenly a man in shining clothes stood before me
He also told them this parable: “Can the blind lead the blind? Will they not both fall into a pit?
Then Jesus said to the centurion, “Go! Let it be done just as you believed it would.” And his servant was healed at that very hour.
Get free (as a fish from a hook)
plant one’s spear firmly into the ground
"You are demon-possessed," the crowd answered. "Who is trying to kill you?"
“Sir,” the woman said, “I can see that you are a prophet.
Your trust deceived you.
o project beyond a certain point.
abundant
not to become easily unsettled or alarmed by the teaching allegedly from us—whether by a prophecy or by word of mouth or by letter—asserting that the day of the Lord has already come.
next
Then Judas, the one who would betray him, said, “Surely you don’t mean me, Rabbi?” Jesus answered, “You have said so.”
But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law muttered, "This man welcomes sinners and eats with them."
marmot
dip
They weren’t our companions who came here to our place.
Their hair was like women's hair, and their teeth were like lions' teeth.
Therefore do not be partners with them.
fragrant herb used in cooking
Therefore I glory in Christ Jesus in my service to God.
In the same way, he sprinkled with the blood both the tabernacle and everything used in its ceremonies.
For no matter how many promises God has made, they are "Yes" in Christ. And so through him the "Amen" is spoken by us to the glory of God.
"I have told you these things, so that in me you may have peace. In this world you will have trouble. But take heart! I have overcome the world."
The fruit of the red pepper is hot when it is ripe.
visit for the first time
When he saw them, he said, “Go, show yourselves to the priests.” And as they went, they were cleansed.
I moved next to Father to sleep.
shout in triumph
Be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly Father is perfect.
wealthy
Name of high mountain range that separates Tigwa from Langilan.
Therefore, since these facts are undeniable, you ought to be quiet and not do anything rash.
Many a time I went from one synagogue to another to have them punished, and I tried to force them to blaspheme. In my obsession against them, I even went to foreign cities to persecute them.
They crucified two robbers with him, one on his right and one on his left.
“I have testimony weightier than that of John. For the works that the Father has given me to finish—the very works that I am doing—testify that the Father has sent me.
Or again, how can anyone enter a strong man’s house and carry off his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man? Then he can plunder his house.
thunder without rain
Rocks are what have been intentionally scattered over the path.
Musical sound of kuglung.
If there is someone who will come from Kapalong for a visit, [he] will have us meet him at the junction [of ??] so that he can find our house so that he won't get lost
teacher
When they had rowed three or three and a half miles, they saw Jesus approaching the boat, walking on the water; and they were terrified.
What is this person who cheats? Just a thief by whom we are being deliberately cheated.
One strand
Dear friend, you are faithful in what you are doing for the brothers, even though they are strangers to you.
thick
The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things they had heard and seen, which were just as they had been told.
Because of this, God gave them over to shameful lusts. Even their women exchanged natural sexual relations for unnatural ones.
Then it goes and takes seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they go in and live there. And the final condition of that man is worse than the first."
But he said to them, “I have food to eat that you know nothing about.”
I was over-occupied because I had guests and I had guests who had arrived at my place.  As for my work, I had not completed it yet because there wasnt time. I was taken away [from my work] by my guests.
Then some boats from Tiberias landed near the place where the people had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
chick
Paul wanted to appear before the crowd, but the disciples would not let him.
The water is returning to its place; receding
After the men had gone a long time without food, Paul stood up before them and said: "Men, you should have taken my advice not to sail from Crete; then you would have spared yourselves this damage and loss.
After we had torn ourselves away from them, we put out to sea and sailed straight to Kos. The next day we went to Rhodes and from there to Patara.
The sharp edge of a knife
Then Jacob went down to Egypt, where he and our ancestors died.
Let us not give up meeting together, as some are in the habit of doing, but let us encourage one another--and all the more as you see the Day approaching.
So the Pharisees and teachers of the law asked Jesus, "Why don't your disciples live according to the tradition of the elders instead of eating their food with 'unclean' hands?"
You will go through the field with a fox.
"If he were not a criminal," they replied, "we would not have handed him over to you."
recently
For the Lord himself will come down from heaven, with a loud command, with the voice of the archangel and with the trumpet call of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first.
He replied, "As you enter the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him to the house that he enters,
For they heard them speaking in tongues and praising God.
Some have departed from these and have turned to meaningless talk.
Slowness
The person who is lying in ambush, strikes his enemy when he spears him.
small, tiny
Jesus said to them, "I tell you the truth, it is not Moses who has given you the bread from heaven, but it is my Father who gives you the true bread from heaven.
spine of a leaf
If your love does not change to another girl, then you have identified the girl with whom you had an agreement to be the one whom you would marry.
“It has been said, ‘Anyone who divorces his wife must give her a certificate of divorce.’
As for that, it refers to different kinds of fish.
lot
But now apart from the law the righteousness of God has been made known, to which the Law and the Prophets testify.
Benita married as a child.
I have a heavy shirt. If someone asks for it I won't give it because I refrain from giving it because it was very expensive for me to buy.
Those who live according to the flesh have their minds set on what the flesh desires; but those who live in accordance with the Spirit have their minds set on what the Spirit desires.  The mind governed by the flesh is death, but the mind governed by the Spirit is life and peace.
He measured its wall and it was 144 cubits thick, by man's measurement, which the angel was using.
The alag nut is astringent when we chew it. It is used to stop bleeding if someone has been cut.
So when you give to the needy, do not announce it with trumpets, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and on the streets, to be honored by others. Truly I tell you, they have received their reward in full.
Bar handle
This calls for patient endurance on the part of the saints who obey God's commandments and remain faithful to Jesus.
After three months we put out to sea in a ship that had wintered in the island. It was an Alexandrian ship with the figurehead of the twin gods Castor and Pollux.
Therefore, since we have such a hope, we are very bold.
But if I drive out demons by the finger of God, then the kingdom of God has come to you.
A whole clump of bamboo was cracked when a dead tree fell on top of it.
Abraham was the father of Isaac, Isaac the father of Jacob, Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers,
A person who does not pay attention to their own attitudes but then does not realize their own emotions.
Brothers and sisters, my heart’s desire and prayer to God for the Israelites is that they may be saved.
"The second came and said, 'Sir, your mina has earned five more.'
There
And again, “I will put my trust in him.” And again he says, “Here am I, and the children God has given me.”
A kind of tree
Rejoice with those who rejoice; mourn with those who mourn.
They are not arranged yet
They went and found a colt outside in the street, tied at a doorway. As they untied it,
This is the disciple who testifies to these things and who wrote them down. We know that his testimony is true.
A drunk person staggers as he is walking and keeps toppling from one side to another as he takes steps.
When we happened to meet each other at the curve of the path, we happened to take each other by surprise. We simultaneously said, “People!”
chop sugarcane into short lengths for eating.
For this very reason, Christ died and returned to life so that he might be the Lord of both the dead and the living.
Ten
attentive
millipede
stubby-tailed animal
I know your afflictions and your poverty—yet you are rich! I know about the slander of those who say they are Jews and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
The comb, that is what is the multi-layered container for the honey and the larvae of the aggressive bees.
Old
firstfruits thanksgiving ceremony
To touch and lick fingers
“Martha, Martha,” the Lord answered, “you are worried and upset about many things,
But the day of the Lord will come like a thief. The heavens will disappear with a roar; the elements will be destroyed by fire, and the earth and everything in it will be laid bare.
rub between hands
After we had been there a number of days, a prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
Flat land
The woman was given the two wings of a great eagle, so that she might fly to the place prepared for her in the wilderness, where she would be taken care of for a time, times and half a time, out of the serpent’s reach.
for an animal to play or romp, especially cats or dogs
Don’t we have the right to take a believing wife along with us, as do the other apostles and the Lord’s brothers and Cephas?
receive something
If your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to enter life maimed or crippled than to have two hands or two feet and be thrown into eternal fire.
But when he saw the wind, he was afraid and, beginning to sink, cried out, “Lord, save me!”
but when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
No matter where he may catch a pig, he endures carrying it on his back.
I begged your disciples to drive it out, but they could not.”
The seed that fell among thorns stands for those who hear, but as they go on their way they are choked by life’s worries, riches and pleasures, and they do not mature.
Life
sneak up
Now send men to Joppa to bring back a man named Simon who is called Peter.
(both Jews and converts to Judaism); Cretans and Arabs—we hear them declaring the wonders of God in our own tongues!”
Who are you to judge someone else’s servant? To their own master, servants stand or fall. And they will stand, for the Lord is able to make them stand.
Therefore encourage each other with these words.
climb up
While they were listening to this, he went on to tell them a parable, because he was near Jerusalem and the people thought that the kingdom of God was going to appear at once.
But Paul shouted, "Don't harm yourself! We are all here!"
Some people are slow to get out of breath when he/she swims underwater and touches the bottom of a deep pool.
What good is it for a man to gain the whole world, yet forfeit his soul? Or what can a man give in exchange for his soul?
to Inadvertently exposed to smoke
To crack
This is how it will be at the end of the age. The angels will come and separate the wicked from the righteous
stab upward with a spear as through the floor
Jesus miraculously healed many people.
remove a thorn by scraping or pressing
A cut field, of rice or other grain; year
You watch over the dead, your emotional pain accompanies you, you weep and sit in silence. That is when a person does not talk.
Some women were watching from a distance. Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James the younger and of Joses, and Salome.
Someone gave his trousers to another person because it was too tight at the waist and was no longer right for him.
desire, want
Move forward
A kind of wood.
and when he found him, he brought him to Antioch. So for a whole year Barnabas and Saul met with the church and taught great numbers of people. The disciples were called Christians first at Antioch.
Now, Lord, consider their threats and enable your servants to speak your word with great boldness.
“Two people owed money to a certain moneylender. One owed him five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
Then it goes and takes with it seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they go in and live there. And the final condition of that person is worse than the first. That is how it will be with this wicked generation.”
swim deeply
But they insisted, "He stirs up the people all over Judea by his teaching. He started in Galilee and has come all the way here."
give outright
We love because he first loved us.
Cut-down cogon grass.
A tall person is tall.
You, my brothers, were called to be free. But do not use your freedom to indulge the sinful nature ; rather, serve one another in love.
Since everything will be destroyed in this way, what kind of people ought you to be? You ought to live holy and godly lives
glint of reflected light, as from gold or gems
Timothy, my son, I am giving you this command in keeping with the prophecies once made about you, so that by recalling them you may fight the battle well,
When two days of  [this] process has been completed, finally that agkud can be eaten.
to die; to kill
This is what we speak, not in words taught us by human wisdom but in words taught by the Spirit, expressing spiritual truths in spiritual words.
Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ send greetings.
(With the payment he received for his wickedness, Judas bought a field; there he fell headlong, his body burst open and all his intestines spilled out.
to have goose pimples; to be feverish with chills
Men will faint from terror, apprehensive of what is coming on the world, for the heavenly bodies will be shaken.
When they come from the marketplace they do not eat unless they wash. And they observe many other traditions, such as the washing of cups, pitchers and kettles. )
The farmer sows the word.
and how from infancy you have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
Unripe (as bananas or corn)
Therefore, brothers, since we have confidence to enter the Most Holy Place by the blood of Jesus,
For he "has put everything under his feet." Now when it says that "everything" has been put under him, it is clear that this does not include God himself, who put everything under Christ.
He plied him with many questions, but Jesus gave him no answer.
At the time of the banquet he sent his servant to tell those who had been invited, 'Come, for everything is now ready.'
poetic term for kiss
There was an estate nearby that belonged to Publius, the chief official of the island. He welcomed us to his home and showed us generous hospitality for three days.
For this reason, since the day we heard about you, we have not stopped praying for you and asking God to fill you with the knowledge of his will through all spiritual wisdom and understanding.
Dilidaly
For everything in the world--the cravings of sinful man, the lust of his eyes and the boasting of what he has and does--comes not from the Father but from the world.
Rush it to its destination (lit. you rush to take it). We will cause it to be taken quickly [to its destination].
catch or get
This is my defense to those who sit in judgment on me.
plead for mercy
When neither sun nor stars appeared for many days and the storm continued raging, we finally gave up all hope of being saved.
The Word became flesh and made his dwelling among us. We have seen his glory, the glory of the one and only Son, who came from the Father, full of grace and truth.
brought another tree with it when it fell
The water testifies
Knot (tree joint; bamboo joint)
“We know he is our son,” the parents answered, “and we know he was born blind.”
bathe someone
mutual
“But to you who are listening I say: Love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
But there is a place where someone has testified: “What is mankind that you are mindful of them, a son of man that you care for him?
“Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
But whenever anyone turns to the Lord, the veil is taken away.
Kind of tree with red sap resembling blood
mouth
When the trigger of the pig trap is released, a pig which has been caught.
So the law was our guardian until Christ came that we might be justified by faith.
Formerly, when you did not know God, you were slaves to those who by nature are not gods.
So we all agreed to choose some men and send them to you with our dear friends Barnabas and Paul—
So if the whole church comes together and everyone speaks in tongues, and some who do not understand or some unbelievers come in, will they not say that you are out of your mind?
No one has ever seen God; but if we love one another, God lives in us and his love is made complete in us.
The kalayag spirit will punish.
I will destine you to poverty because you did not treat me well.
fourth
“But now I am going to him who sent me. None of you asks me, ‘Where are you going?’”
At that time they had a well-known prisoner whose name was Jesus Barabbas.
and say to the owner of the house, 'The Teacher asks: Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?'
Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: "The one I kiss is the man; arrest him and lead him away under guard."
Watch your life and doctrine closely. Persevere in them, because if you do, you will save both yourself and your hearers.
You blind guides! You strain out a gnat but swallow a camel.
be depressed
female; woman; unmarried woman
“As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit came on them as he had come on us at the beginning.
A rooster will peck [us] if we bother their chicks.
go into a weedy or uncut area
Barb, thorn
struggle to free oneself
That word "teach" doesn't fit the context because the concept was a result of rebellion.
A priest happened to be going down the same road, and when he saw the man, he passed by on the other side.
woven bamboo basket
The dove is a herald
“How do you know me?” Nathanael asked. Jesus answered, “I saw you while you were still under the fig tree before Philip called you.”
Twenty
When we aim [a gun] at a bird, and when iwe have sighted  it [we] shoot the gun the and then [the bird] is hit.
If we cross swift water, we have to step firmly when crossing because we will be pushed over as it is foaming.
In the same way, any of you who does not give up everything he has cannot be my disciple.
Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free."
A kind of short cogon grass.
Likewise the tongue is a small part of the body, but it makes great boasts. Consider what a great forest is set on fire by a small spark.
No one will scold you because I have made the decision.
Great fear seized the whole church and all who heard about these events.
On the first day of the week we came together to break bread. Paul spoke to the people and, because he intended to leave the next day, kept on talking until midnight.
Yet even then their testimony did not agree.
Then they prayed, “Lord, you know everyone’s heart. Show us which of these two you have chosen
Expression of shame, "Shame on you"
A man in the crowd called out, “Teacher, I beg you to look at my son, for he is my only child.
To become dirty or contaminated
No matter what I say, [my mother] won't agree to stay with her other offspring.
Who is it that overcomes the world? Only he who believes that Jesus is the Son of God.
drink from a water pole.
leave a remnant, not use up everything
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen.
Wives, submit to your husbands as to the Lord.
Anuay is Daddy’s stepchild.
I tell you the truth, whoever accepts anyone I send accepts me; and whoever accepts me accepts the one who sent me."
People who say such things show that they are looking for a country of their own.
I was tired of waiting for you; I [arrived] earlier
Here a great number of disabled people used to lie—the blind, the lame, the paralyzed.
squeeze
To the one we are the smell of death; to the other, the fragrance of life. And who is equal to such a task?
Every island fled away and the mountains could not be found.
If there is anything further you want to bring up, it must be settled in a legal assembly.
When they heard this, they were furious and wanted to put them to death.
The jailer brought them into his house and set a meal before them; he was filled with joy because he had come to believe in God--he and his whole family.
Those whom we call as slaves are the ones who are always made to work. They have a hard time.
A person who becomes alienated from his companion becomes an enemy.
With them they sent the following letter: The apostles and elders, your brothers, To the Gentile believers in Antioch, Syria and Cilicia: Greetings.
It is fine to be zealous, provided the purpose is good, and to be so always, not just when I am with you.
Do I say this merely on human authority? Doesn’t the Law say the same thing?
Very early in the morning, the chief priests, with the elders, the teachers of the law and the whole Sanhedrin, reached a decision. They bound Jesus, led him away and handed him over to Pilate.
To satisfy or satiate (hunger, desire to relax)
Let your gentleness be evident to all. The Lord is near.
trick
The rain came down, the streams rose, and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it fell with a great crash.
But when you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
but to those whom God has called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.
Then I saw a Lamb, looking as if it had been slain, standing in the center of the throne, encircled by the four living creatures and the elders. He had seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent out into all the earth.
Kind of small melon-like fruit.
When morning came, he called his disciples to him and chose twelve of them, whom he also designated apostles:
I know your deeds, your love and faith, your service and perseverance, and that you are now doing more than you did at first.
No one has ever seen God, but the one and only Son, who is himself God and is in closest relationship with the Father, has made him known.
For you yourselves know how you ought to follow our example. We were not idle when we were with you,
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; poor, yet making many rich; having nothing, and yet possessing everything.
father
From that time on Jesus began to explain to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things at the hands of the elders, the chief priests and the teachers of the law, and that he must be killed and on the third day be raised to life.
We scrape the sheath of the knife so that it will become smooth.
Then he told me, "Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, because the time is near.
This is what the ancients were commended for.
Python.
stymied
Then the woman, seeing that she could not go unnoticed, came trembling and fell at his feet. In the presence of all the people, she told why she had touched him and how she had been instantly healed.
Fuzzy, wooly (blanket, tree, plant); hairy animal
It was the day of Preparation of the Passover; it was about noon. “Here is your king,” Pilate said to the Jews.
Cut individual leaves
When Paul came in, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him. They brought many serious charges against him, but they could not prove them.
Lime
The child who turns over on its stomach, scoots forward as it crawls.
touch
The meaning of the sun going down is that it goes over the horizon. It goes out of sight
Only offspring of certain sex; only child
They band together to attack a certain house.As for that raiding, there are very many who will come against those enemies of theirs.
Where is the wise man? Where is the scholar? Where is the philosopher of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world?
I will give you the whole amount of this my money which is just one hundred [pesos] left.
To clear field of brush and unwanted plants, etc.
But if we say, ‘Of human origin’—we are afraid of the people, for they all hold that John was a prophet.”
squeeze juices out, as from shredded coconut
to carve a design into wood with a sharp instrument
predict
but when they saw him walking on the lake, they thought he was a ghost. They cried out,
wade across water
when we walk, we take steps.
"His master replied, 'I will judge you by your own words, you wicked servant! You knew, did you, that I am a hard man, taking out what I did not put in, and reaping what I did not sow?
This is why I write these things when I am absent, that when I come I may not have to be harsh in my use of authority—the authority the Lord gave me for building you up, not for tearing you down.
All the prophets testify about him that everyone who believes in him receives forgiveness of sins through his name.”
And in that place many believed in Jesus.
Parthians, Medes and Elamites; residents of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,
To accuse falsely
There he met a Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus, who had recently come from Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had ordered all Jews to leave Rome. Paul went to see them,
fall over dead.
All the believers were one in heart and mind. No one claimed that any of their possessions was their own, but they shared everything they had.
always changing locations, restless
If someone desires to get married, he will pursue it. He will continuously discuss it with the father of the girl until he agrees.
swift
I sent you to reap what you have not worked for. Others have done the hard work, and you have reaped the benefits of their labor.”
I’ll hire on with you to go downriver by raft because I don’t have any money now.
Burst (as an egg or boil)
wear hair long
Are they servants of Christ? (I am out of my mind to talk like this.) I am more. I have worked much harder, been in prison more frequently, been flogged more severely, and been exposed to death again and again.
I, Tertius, who wrote down this letter, greet you in the Lord.
But the cowardly, the unbelieving, the vile, the murderers, the sexually immoral, those who practice magic arts, the idolaters and all liars--their place will be in the fiery lake of burning sulfur. This is the second death."
As for the creeks, they dry up when it is dry season.
string of an instument
A kind of mottled rice.
set his seal of ownership on us, and put his Spirit in our hearts as a deposit, guaranteeing what is to come.
No widow may be put on the list of widows unless she is over sixty, has been faithful to her husband,
He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. You are badly mistaken!"
Hate
If someone is ill, that is the person over which a shaman will perform a pig sacrifice.
camote
Look at the birds of the air; they do not sow or reap or store away in barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are you not much more valuable than they?
The ground from one mountain, creates a valley over to the slope of the other mountain.
chicken carrier made of rattan
go on a raid.
For this reason he had to be made like his brothers in every way, in order that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in service to God, and that he might make atonement for the sins of the people.
For the foolishness of God is wiser than man's wisdom, and the weakness of God is stronger than man's strength.
And everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.’
One of the high priest's servants, a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, challenged him, "Didn't I see you with him in the olive grove?"
rooted and built up in him, strengthened in the faith as you were taught, and overflowing with thankfulness.
To be operated on
They preached the gospel in that city and won a large number of disciples. Then they returned to Lystra, Iconium and Antioch,
tell a secret
fireplace
and had John beheaded in the prison.
camote.
When the Lamb opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say, “Come!”
Those whom I love I rebuke and discipline. So be earnest, and repent.
For I do not want to see you now and make only a passing visit; I hope to spend some time with you, if the Lord permits.
When Simon saw that the Spirit was given at the laying on of the apostles’ hands, he offered them money
Doctora said, “How many weeks will you be at your home place?” Usì said, “Even so that's OK because I will return soon.”
to be the recipients of an angry outburst
So you too should be glad and rejoice with me.
And we have the word of the prophets made more certain, and you will do well to pay attention to it, as to a light shining in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.
So when Peter went up to Jerusalem, the circumcised believers criticized him
To urge to do or to accept something
To flex; a body joint.
Then some Jews came from Antioch and Iconium and won the crowd over. They stoned Paul and dragged him outside the city, thinking he was dead.
recount
Moreover, demons came out of many people, shouting, “You are the Son of God!” But he rebuked them and would not allow them to speak, because they knew he was the Messiah.
Now about our brother Apollos: I strongly urged him to go to you with the brothers. He was quite unwilling to go now, but he will go when he has the opportunity.
And he is also the father of the circumcised who not only are circumcised but who also walk in the footsteps of the faith that our father Abraham had before he was circumcised.
They completely cut down all of the bamboo for weaving which I had planted without letting it be known by a request. That conduct of theirs usurped the rights of their companion.
It is like a mustard seed, which is the smallest seed you plant in the ground.
expensive, as a bride
To tether or tie by a leash (as chicken, horse).
If the baby (lit. child) in the abdomen has been properly positioned ahead of time, the mother will have it easier when she gives birth.
To the pure, all things are pure, but to those who are corrupted and do not believe, nothing is pure. In fact, both their minds and consciences are corrupted.
Finally they said, “Who are you? Give us an answer to take back to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?”
So the churches were strengthened in the faith and grew daily in numbers.
Your intestines continually wiggle when it is empty
The land of Mindanao, because it is surrounded by the ocean, it is isolated from the land.
People will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, proud, abusive, disobedient to their parents, ungrateful, unholy,
knock
dig camotes
His mother said, "Come here because I will listen to your stomach to find out why your stomach is growling."
kind of rattan fruit
If it seems that one has not brushed one's teeth for several days, that's dirty-teeth.
Do not be yoked together with unbelievers. For what do righteousness and wickedness have in common? Or what fellowship can light have with darkness?
But God, who comforts the downcast, comforted us by the coming of Titus,
That propagate, it will become many and spread there in our place.
chew
We took such a violent battering from the storm that the next day they began to throw the cargo overboard.
Return.
Then he said to the tree, "May no one ever eat fruit from you again." And his disciples heard him say it.
stub one’s toes.
It's not possible to borrow it because the horse's foot is sore.
meander, circle
rungs of a ladder
soup, broth
Raft
Even though I was once a blasphemer and a persecutor and a violent man, I was shown mercy because I acted in ignorance and unbelief.
I repeat: Let no one take me for a fool. But if you do, then tolerate me just as you would a fool, so that I may do a little boasting.
The elders who direct the affairs of the church well are worthy of double honor, especially those whose work is preaching and teaching.
add onto
He answered, "Anyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman commits adultery against her.
If my child avails himself/herself of an opportunity to eat at someone else's house, I will scold him/her.
Salmon the father of Boaz, whose mother was Rahab, Boaz the father of Obed, whose mother was Ruth, Obed the father of Jesse,
Mary wasn't a true foreigner because she mearly slept [somewhere] for one night.
He redeemed us in order that the blessing given to Abraham might come to the Gentiles through Christ Jesus, so that by faith we might receive the promise of the Spirit.
Camote or corn which has been chewed on by a rat
But the other criminal rebuked him. "Don't you fear God," he said, "since you are under the same sentence?
Two days
Peter looked straight at him, as did John. Then Peter said, “Look at us!”
Lure
Mother is frustrated because she has a lot of rice to weed. She says her rice will be wasted if she cannot finish weeding.
be implicated; accused
blind boil
Jesus straightened up and asked her, “Woman, where are they? Has no one condemned you?”
The soldiers planned to kill the prisoners to prevent any of them from swimming away and escaping.
Kind of large forest tree with large leaves.
follow around
For everyone who asks receives; the one who seeks finds; and to the one who knocks, the door will be opened.
He must turn from evil and do good; he must seek peace and pursue it.
The water of a side channel flows through and joins  the body [of the river].  It is called the junction of the rivers.
“I baptize with water,” John replied, “but among you stands one you do not know.
Going at once to Jesus, Judas said, “Greetings, Rabbi!” and kissed him.
size
eye leech
To flap, as a rooster flaps its wings.
To do something very well, carefully or accurately
Fight the good fight of the faith. Take hold of the eternal life to which you were called when you made your good confession in the presence of many witnesses.
Here there is no Greek or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave or free, but Christ is all, and is in all.
shake a container to check for liquid
To swim overhand; to wave arms around
Shared with; we are given a share.
And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
have dysentery (of baby only)
The officers reported this to the magistrates, and when they heard that Paul and Silas were Roman citizens, they were alarmed.
Then the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go.
"We are going up to Jerusalem," he said, "and the Son of Man will be betrayed to the chief priests and teachers of the law. They will condemn him to death and will hand him over to the Gentiles,
A person who has chills feels cold because they have malaria.
We warm ourselves by a fire if we are chilled when it is soon to dawn.
The woman was dressed in purple and scarlet, and was glittering with gold, precious stones and pearls. She held a golden cup in her hand, filled with abominable things and the filth of her adulteries.
A locust.
Jesus replied, "I will ask you one question. Answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I am doing these things.
protest against anything offending the senses of smell, taste or feel;
Land that is mostly flat but has some hills like the Nauli area
Some of his disciples were remarking about how the temple was adorned with beautiful stones and with gifts dedicated to God. But Jesus said,
The bridegroom was a long time in coming, and they all became drowsy and fell asleep.
Eat anything raw
To remove dishes and leftovers after a meal has been eaten.
it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. If there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual body.
For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil. Some people, eager for money, have wandered from the faith and pierced themselves with many griefs.
shaman ceremony
“I no longer call you servants, because a servant does not know his master’s business. Instead, I have called you friends, for everything that I learned from my Father I have made known to you.”
They all condemned him as worthy of death. Then some began to spit at him; they blindfolded him, struck him with their fists, and said, "Prophesy!" And the guards took him and beat him.
For this is the time of punishment in fulfillment of all that has been written.
Agot-ot soil is red and gooey. It is used to make clay pots.
To be show-through
Jesus answered them, "It is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick.
Dried salted fish
Command and teach these things.
scrape
blink
so they too have now become disobedient in order that they too may now receive mercy as a result of God's mercy to you.
They traveled through the whole island until they came to Paphos. There they met a Jewish sorcerer and false prophet named Bar-Jesus,
If someone collects payment for a horse but it has been sold on credit, the person who has gotten the horse can use anything whatever for payment.
bark container for storing rice
powerful due to wealth or status
You, however, did not come to know Christ that way
You should not be surprised at my saying, ‘You must be born again.’
The ashes will become dust if they are carried by the wind. Flour if we shake out the sack of flour, it will become dust because it becomes airborne.
to determine
Baguntaas is the halfway point between Valencia and Nasuli.
I felt the sting of that centepede which had bitten my foot.
“And for your sake I am glad I was not there, so that you may believe. But let us go to him.”
The [word] aku, it goes with the [word] betray/twist
"Then the Lord said to me, 'Go; I will send you far away to the Gentiles.' "
That's how big it is.
Guess
The person who sows rice seed in his field just sows it evenly so that it will all be the same and there will be none sown thickly.
It’s stained already.
As for grubs, one makes notches in the wood; it is grooved.
During the night Paul had a vision of a man of Macedonia standing and begging him, “Come over to Macedonia and help us.”
altar of rattan leaves
exhausted
Our fathers disciplined us for a little while as they thought best; but God disciplines us for our good, that we may share in his holiness.
Because
The edge of the river which is flat in which reeds grow, that is soft soil ground.
At that time the son born according to the flesh persecuted the son born by the power of the Spirit. It is the same now.
Stitch
He chose the lowly things of this world and the despised things--and the things that are not--to nullify the things that are,
first
so that you may be able to discern what is best and may be pure and blameless for the day of Christ,
And if your right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off and throw it away. It is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole body to go into hell.
kind of tree with sticky bark
and so were James and John, the sons of Zebedee, Simon’s partners. Then Jesus said to Simon, “Don’t be afraid; from now on you will fish for people.”
to keep oneself ready to move
Emotionally strong (resisting undeserved abuse)
If your right eye causes you to stumble, gouge it out and throw it away. It is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole body to be thrown into hell.
Now when Jesus saw the crowds, he went up on a mountainside and sat down. His disciples came to him,
And this is the will of him who sent me, that I shall lose none of all that he has given me, but raise them up at the last day.
But after the disciples had gathered around him, he got up and went back into the city. The next day he and Barnabas left for Derbe.
But avoid foolish controversies and genealogies and arguments and quarrels about the law, because these are unprofitable and useless.
To use something to smooth by scraping or sanding such as sandpaper, a knife or other instrument, metal or bamboo.
mouth condition resembling thrush
The king rose, and with him the governor and Bernice and those sitting with them.
As they were coming down the mountain, Jesus gave them orders not to tell anyone what they had seen until the Son of Man had risen from the dead.
But this is how God fulfilled what he had foretold through all the prophets, saying that his Messiah would suffer.
The wall was made of jasper, and the city of pure gold, as pure as glass.
and he overthrew seven nations in Canaan, giving their land to his people as their inheritance.
To break one’s jaw
tackle
A kind of vine.
Boring insects/weevils (invade wood, bamboo, grains, beans)
To be cursed
Squeak, as a rat
A sticky variety of bee’s wax from the non-stinging tamusan bee
make a fireplace
Some, however, made fun of them and said, “They have had too much wine.”
Perseverance must finish its work so that you may be mature and complete, not lacking anything
stomachache
When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard Jesus’ parables, they knew he was talking about them.
to be made new in the attitude of your minds;
so Christ was sacrificed once to take away the sins of many people; and he will appear a second time, not to bear sin, but to bring salvation to those who are waiting for him.
To pull up, as a weed.
Show me your faith without deeds, and I will show you my faith by what I do. You believe that there is one God. Good! Even the demons believe that-- and shudder.
But after he had considered this, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, “Joseph son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary home as your wife, because what is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
To die the same day as someone has visited one’s village
Slice the cassava thinly because we will dry it after a while.
What good is it for someone to gain the whole world, and yet lose or forfeit their very self?
The abu-on bird, it's like the color (lit. design) of ashes. It's not so white; it's [color] is mixed.
become darkened
Simon answered, “Master, we’ve worked hard all night and haven’t caught anything. But because you say so, I will let down the nets.”
poisonous multicolored snake
emotionally distraught
‘Because no one has hired us,’ they answered. He said to them, ‘You also go and work in my vineyard.’
touch
Do it like this
Then I saw a great white throne and him who was seated on it. Earth and sky fled from his presence, and there was no place for them.
horse
What I say to you, I say to everyone: 'Watch!' "
feel hurt or angry
He answered, ‘Then I beg you, father, send Lazarus to my family,
The blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are ceremonially unclean sanctify them so that they are outwardly clean.
withhold food
disobey or go beyond someone’s advice
If he called them 'gods,' to whom the word of God came--and the Scripture cannot be broken--
As you go, proclaim this message: ‘The kingdom of heaven has come near.’
He has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David
and they went to another village.
Be wise in the way you act toward outsiders; make the most of every opportunity.
as for zeal, persecuting the church; as for legalistic righteousness, faultless.
I will show wonders in the heavens above and signs on the earth below, blood and fire and billows of smoke.
afraid
Successfully make purchase transaction
extended rainy spell
To agree
upper back
Then Herod and his soldiers ridiculed and mocked him. Dressing him in an 1563 elegant robe, they sent him back to Pilate.
lazy
be rotted from rain, as rope, cloth, or bamboo fence
To catch someone in the process of doing something
baby laku
pinch each other
Then should not this woman, a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has kept bound for eighteen long years, be 1541 set free on the Sabbath day from what bound her?"
When we have been there for a day, we will continue on to our true destination.
If we have [a part of the field] which we will leave over, we will isection off that good part near the edge [of the field] for seed.
to have social dealings or business with
They found the stone rolled away from the tomb,
Swallow the medicine.
From the sky huge hailstones of about a hundred pounds each fell upon men. And they cursed God on account of the plague of hail, because the plague was so terrible
As for cats, when they are in heat or their time of mating arrives, they are always meowing when it is night time.
Dear friends, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
In that day you will no longer ask me anything. I tell you the truth, my Father will give you whatever you ask in my name.
wear a wrap-around skirt high enough to cover breasts
When it was decided that we would sail for Italy, Paul and some other prisoners were handed over to a centurion named Julius, who belonged to the Imperial Regiment.
be affected by an evil spirit
kind of bamboo
regret.
Small honey bee that makes its nest in a hole in a tree
Cut pieces out of that wood when it’s dry.
You yourselves can testify that I said, ‘I am not the Messiah but am sent ahead of him.’
And they stayed there a long time with the disciples.
Personal case-marking particle oblique
meddle with or interfere
So he went and hired himself out to a citizen of that country, who sent him to his fields to feed pigs.
cut off.
So when those came who were hired first, they expected to receive more. But each one of them also received a denarius.
At the time when the rice was harvested, they shared with those who, in contrast to others, didn't have anything to harvest, and so all the people were able to eat.
To saw such as for sawing wood
The next day he took out two denarii and gave them to the innkeeper. ‘Look after him,’ he said, ‘and when I return, I will reimburse you for any extra expense you may have.’
There will be great earthquakes, famines and pestilences in various places, and fearful events and great signs from heaven.
If we have a companion who walks fast, we will hurry fast to catch up [with him.]
For bees to abandon their former hive
Then a man named Jairus, a synagogue leader, came and fell at Jesus’ feet, pleading with him to come to his house
Therefore, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?”
After they had further proclaimed the word of the Lord and testified about Jesus, Peter and John returned to Jerusalem, preaching the gospel in many Samaritan villages.
You brood of vipers, how can you who are evil say anything good? For the mouth speaks what the heart is full of.
crooked
This will result in your being witnesses to them.
Older person; adult
One of them, the disciple whom Jesus loved, was reclining next to him.
This is what I’ll pay you for healing us.
I warn everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: If anyone adds anything to them, God will add to him the plagues described in this book.
To become marked by an impression from something
His winnowing fork is in his hand to clear his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his barn, but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
The girl's thinking will become good and she will think about her family but she will despise her husband.
Let us then approach God’s throne of grace with confidence, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need.
because you will not abandon me to the realm of the dead, you will not let your holy one see decay.
Kind of mold
two hundred
chewed off
One meal.
When Jesus looked up and saw a great crowd coming toward him, he said to Philip, "Where shall we buy bread for these people to eat?"
Suppose one of you has a servant plowing or looking after the sheep. Will he say to the servant when he comes in from the field, ‘Come along now and sit down to eat’?
Simon Peter asked him, "Lord, where are you going?" Jesus replied, "Where I am going, you cannot follow now, but you will follow later."
"I told them that it is not the Roman custom to hand over any man before he has faced his accusers and has had an opportunity to defend himself against their charges.
Liver
So he immediately sent an executioner with orders to bring John's head. The man went, beheaded John in the prison,
She put her hands in the pot [to pick something up ??].
but Jesus asked him, "Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?"
They think it strange that you do not plunge with them into the same flood of dissipation, and they heap abuse on you.
"When you are brought before synagogues, rulers and authorities, do not worry about how you will defend yourselves or what you will say,
When you lean on something for floatation you line up your body with the bamboo [pole]. You use your hands to paddle
part
to persuade (by talking into) as a girl to sing
ashes
corn
It is written: “I believed; therefore I have spoken.” Since we have that same spirit of faith, we also believe and therefore speak,
behind
At my first defense, no one came to my support, but everyone deserted me. May it not be held against them.
Inappropriate
and to the disciple, "Here is your mother." From that time on, this disciple took her into his home.
Your attitude should be the same as that of Christ Jesus:
Then Barnabas went to Tarsus to look for Saul,
The child who is slow to finish what he was given to eat, he is hoarding his food.
measure off
Inflate
For he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight. In love
and so, somehow, to attain to the resurrection from the dead.
The hornbill has his mouth open to be fed.
village on the Liboganon River
To pay up front
When a pig is caught in a pig trap, the trigger is released and the wild pig is pierced.
Kind of white rice
As was his custom, Paul went into the synagogue, and on three Sabbath days he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
If the measles illness reaches some place, if there is someone who visits from that place, the disease will be transmitted to us.
cracked
Abaca bark.
When he learned from the centurion that it was so, he gave the body to Joseph.
A woman is bound to her husband as long as he lives. But if her husband dies, she is free to marry anyone she wishes, but he must belong to the Lord.
Be out of breath as when one is congested
So you must be careful to do everything they tell you. But do not do what they do, for they do not practice what they preach.
But you, dear friends, build yourselves up in your most holy faith and pray in the Holy Spirit.
They were trampled in the winepress outside the city, and blood flowed out of the press, rising as high as the horses' bridles for a distance of 1,600 stadia.
to develop infected sores
I plead with you, brothers and sisters, become like me, for I became like you. You did me no wrong.
A junction or crossing, as of a highway or two rivers.
There was a person who was looking for someone to hire because he had twenty sacks of corn but no one to be his partner when he traveled downriver on his raft.
The tenants seized his servants; they beat one, killed another, and stoned a third.
But Peter and John replied, “Which is right in God’s eyes: to listen to you, or to him? You be the judges!
start or jerk, as when feverish or nervous
As for an electric light, when its brightness is removed it goes out.
The sun is setting when  it pases the mountain and goes over the horizon.
So the man gave them his attention, expecting to get something from them.
safety pin
We have plenty of food now.
Two blind men were sitting by the roadside, and when they heard that Jesus was going by, they shouted, “Lord, Son of David, have mercy on us!”
very
The rain has stopped.
"Suppose one of you has a hundred sheep and loses one of them. Does he not leave the ninety-nine in the open country and go after the lost sheep until he finds it?
Narrow
red splotches on the skin of a young baby's body which disappear when the child grows older
Just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness, so the Son of Man must be lifted up,
Unaccustomed standing
The man who says, "I know him," but does not do what he commands is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
Ashes
Then Jesus said to the chief priests, the officers of the temple guard, and the elders, who had come for him, "Am I leading a rebellion, that you have come with swords and clubs?
To repair
“So he left the land of the Chaldeans and settled in Harran. After the death of his father, God sent him to this land where you are now living.
Do not give dogs what is sacred; do not throw your pearls to pigs. If you do, they may trample them under their feet, and then turn and tear you to pieces.
As for a vertical jump, we [jump] upwards.
Those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the sinful nature with its passions and desires.
(If anyone does not know how to manage his own family, how can he take care of God’s church?)
In the morning, as they went along, they saw the fig tree withered from the roots.
But the mother said, "That's enough from this child who won't get rid of the subject of his arguing."
If we love our companions and they also care about us, that is what it means to have a good relationship.
Dung
At that time Jesus, full of joy through the Holy Spirit, said, “I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children. Yes, Father, for this is what you were pleased to do.
if you know his will and approve of what is superior because you are instructed by the law;
Pollywog
Instead, one of the soldiers pierced Jesus' side with a spear, bringing a sudden flow of blood and water.
Don’t let anyone deceive you in any way, for that day will not come until the rebellion occurs and the man of lawlessness is revealed, the man doomed to destruction.
slide deliberately, as down a pole
Urinate
exclamation of surprise.
A damolugan lizard is roasted and fed to a child as a remedy for that which is making him/her thin.
Kind of soft, fragrant wood similar to mahogany, has a reddish center. It is used to make boats or roof shingles.
To teach
Clamshell, clam.
Shouldn’t you have had mercy on your fellow servant just as I had on you?’
Put the mortar under the house lest it get rained on.
As for the unmarried men and the unmarried women, if there is a necklace or a bracelet of a leg band which they covet, they will be quick to ask for it.
They will turn their ears away from the truth and turn aside to myths.
To be freed (from charm or spell)
brass lime container
The number of those who ate was four thousand men, besides women and children.
heap of tobacco
Let's gather closely together. We will listen to what the leader will say.
And if anyone gives even a cup of cold water to one of these little ones who is my disciple, truly I tell you, that person will certainly not lose their reward.”
breath
But when Herod heard this, he said, "John, the man I beheaded, has been raised from the dead!"
That which is used as payment for a brideprice
After Paul and Silas came out of the prison, they went to Lydia's house, where they met with the brothers and encouraged them. Then they left.
To recover
large bead.
The week which will follow has already begun.
A few days later King Agrippa and Bernice arrived at Caesarea to pay their respects to Festus.
Head
We cause [people] to hear what we have to say.
I have seen and I testify that this is God’s Chosen One.”
to rescue us from the hand of our enemies, and to enable us to serve him without fear
our
cornfield
Our understanding [of the meaning] is uncluttered, straight and clear.
For through the law I died to the law so that I might live for God.
But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and forever! Amen.
The first angel sounded his trumpet, and there came hail and fire mixed with blood, and it was hurled down upon the earth. A third of the earth was burned up, a third of the trees were burned up, and all the green grass was burned up.
relentlessly pursue
filled out or expanded
Middle of night, or zenith of moon
All who rely on observing the law are under a curse, for it is written: "Cursed is everyone who does not continue to do everything written in the Book of the Law."
location
As obedient children, do not conform to the evil desires you had when you lived in ignorance.
collect a payment
My daughter, Jeany, fell from a santol tree.
exercize self control.
the people living in darkness have seen a great light; on those living in the land of the shadow of death a light has dawned.”
air
Pray for us. We are sure that we have a clear conscience and desire to live honorably in every way.
many
The one who sows to please his sinful nature, from that nature will reap destruction; the one who sows to please the Spirit, from the Spirit will reap eternal life.
large round cicada, locust
They will use speech that hits the mark. It will establish the truth of the matter. The person cannot answer back.
Why are you living there [on the ground] when you have work here?
If an illness comes to some place, [and] if someone visits from that place, the illness will be transmitted to us.
clear
It is a tree that when struck with a knife its body bleeds.
If I take part in the meal with thankfulness, why am I denounced because of something I thank God for?
for everyone born of God overcomes the world. This is the victory that has overcome the world, even our faith.
The people living in that place feel unsafe; All of them will pack up and move at the same time because something is making [them] afraid.
If any man builds on this foundation using gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay or straw,
To retrieve
confront
There was a day when I was attacked by two wasps which suddenly stung me.
They took soundings and found that the water was a hundred and twenty feet deep. A short time later they took soundings again and found it was ninety feet deep.
"I am," said Jesus. "And you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of the Mighty One and coming on the clouds of heaven."
having no mother
But Jesus said, “Someone touched me; I know that power has gone out from me.”
But when God, who set me apart from my mother’s womb and called me by his grace, was pleased  to reveal his Son in me so that I might preach him among the Gentiles, my immediate response was not to consult any human being.
There are different kinds of gifts, but the same Spirit distributes them.
clay cooking pot
To ask privately.
Jesus replied, "If I glorify myself, my glory means nothing. My Father, whom you claim as your God, is the one who glorifies me.
But Peter insisted emphatically, "Even if I have to die with you, I will never disown you." And all the others said the same.
“Right then three men who had been sent to me from Caesarea stopped at the house where I was staying.
Immediately Jesus knew in his spirit that this was what they were thinking in their hearts, and he said to them, "Why are you thinking these things?
For it is not those who hear the law who are righteous in God’s sight, but it is those who obey the law who will be declared righteous.
This man lived in the tombs, and no one could bind him any more, not even with a chain. For he had often been chained hand and foot, but he tore the chains apart and broke the irons on his feet. No one was strong enough to subdue him.
If you won't watch over [the children], go searching for something to eat.
I watched as he opened the sixth seal. There was a great earthquake. The sun turned black like sackcloth made of goat hair, the whole moon turned blood red,
The person who has something that is making him feel badly, he will strengthen himself so that he can endure the difficulty which he has encountered.
They also will answer, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or needing clothes or sick or in prison, and did not help you?’
to break up, turn over, as the soil in a field
The woman said to him, “Sir, give me this water so that I won’t get thirsty and have to keep coming here to draw water.”
the son of Enosh, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.
The teachers of the law and the Pharisees brought in a woman caught in adultery. They made her stand before the group
Igì’s hair is very black.
To stab
Pilate then went back inside the palace, summoned Jesus and asked him, "Are you the king of the Jews?"
[Some manuscripts include: “For an angel of the Lord went down at certain seasons into the pool and stirred up the water; whoever then first, after the stirring of the water, stepped in was made well from whatever disease with which he was afflicted.”]
When you hear of wars and revolutions, do not be frightened. These things must happen first, but the end will not come right away."
and a woman was there who had been crippled by a spirit for eighteen years. She was bent over and could not straighten up at all.
hide
He was faithful to the one who appointed him, just as Moses was faithful in all God’s house.
In my Father's house are many rooms; if it were not so, I would have told you. I am going there to prepare a place for you.
Terminate.
dump out
And Isaiah boldly says, “I was found by those who did not seek me; I revealed myself to those who did not ask for me.”
They left that place and passed through Galilee. Jesus did not want anyone to know where they were,
Stone.
Become, change into something else.
And as for you, brothers and sisters, never tire of doing what is good.
root; getting roots
tremble as in a trance
“Come, follow me,” Jesus said, “and I will send you out to fish for people.”
Early in the morning, as Jesus was on his way back to the city, he was hungry.
As he approached the town gate, a dead person was being carried out—the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. And a large crowd from the town was with her.
hole, as in the ground or in an object
The word mako-on means that what is eaten is plentiful here at Nasuli and there is no famine.
cook meat with camotes
Watch out for false prophets. They come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ferocious wolves.
"that it may go well with you and that you may enjoy long life on the earth."
For when we were in the realm of the flesh, the sinful passions aroused by the law were at work in us, so that we bore fruit for death.
But they remained silent. So taking hold of the man, he healed him and sent him away.
If we see someone to whom we are related whom we have not yet met, we feel confident toward him.
The words “it was credited to him” were written not for him alone,
To teach to a person or animal how to do something.
Do not put out the Spirit's fire;
"When a strong man, fully armed, guards his own house, his possessions are safe. But when someone stronger attacks and overpowers him, he takes away the armor in which the man trusted and divides up the spoils.
It was cold, and the servants and officials stood around a fire they had made to keep warm. Peter also was standing with them, warming himself.
A river tributary of the Liboganon
After Jesus had said this, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
In her was found the blood of prophets and of the saints, and of all who have been killed on the earth."
The people were amazed when they saw the mute speaking, the crippled made well, the lame walking and the blind seeing. And they praised the God of Israel.
I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, who has given me strength, that he considered me trustworthy, appointing me to his service.
entire hand, up to the wrist
As for [the word] aboy “assumption” one can assume correctly or incorrectly.
When he has finished dumping the rocks, they fall
"But at the beginning of creation God 'made them male and female.'
There were no more people; there was no more talking which we could hear.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall trouble or hardship or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword?
slanderers, God-haters, insolent, arrogant and boastful; they invent ways of doing evil; they disobey their parents;
The angel went to her and said, “Greetings, you who are highly favored! The Lord is with you.”
weak
Then after fourteen years, I went up again to Jerusalem, this time with Barnabas. I took Titus along also.
That day when evening came, he said to his disciples, "Let us go over to the other side."
weather
Big stomach
Sour; to have one’s teeth set on edge from a scraping sound.
A skin disease
If we are taken by suprise that a person falls over and goes ahead [and] dies, that is [the meaning of] falling over dead.
spin or whirl fast as a propellor
widower
Some men came carrying a paralyzed man on a mat and tried to take him into the house to lay him before Jesus.
Medicine.
As you enter the home, give it your greeting.  If the home is deserving, let your peace rest on it; if it is not, let your peace return to you.
leap, as a dog leaping for an object
Peacemakers who sow in peace raise a harvest of righteousness.
Two are riding the horse; one behind the other.
Sharp
If there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “Don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
So when we could stand it no longer, we thought it best to be left by ourselves in Athens.
Someone saw honey bees and he pointed them out to his companion.
Ancestors
But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.”
Fertilized but underdeveloped egg (spoiled before hatching)
Then he looked at those seated in a circle around him and said, "Here are my mother and my brothers! Whoever does God's will is my brother and sister and mother."
Dance the baby.
It was about this time that King Herod arrested some who belonged to the church, intending to persecute them.
They replied, “It has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and you are going to raise it in three days?”
suffer a change of circumstances
slay
At this the man's face fell. He went away sad, because he had great wealth.
“Which ones?” he inquired. Jesus replied, “‘You shall not murder, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal, you shall not give false testimony,
But in fact God has arranged the parts in the body, every one of them, just as he wanted them to be.
And the one who sat there had the appearance of jasper and ruby. A rainbow that shone like an emerald encircled the throne.
But when the sun came up, the plants were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
“Truly I tell you,” Jesus said to them, “no one who has left home or wife or brothers or sisters or parents or children for the sake of the kingdom of God
Night and day, whether he sleeps or gets up, the seed sprouts and grows, though he does not know how.
To say whew when out of breath
My brothers, if one of you should wander from the truth and someone should bring him back,
To follow the channel of a creek.
But some of them went to the Pharisees and told them what Jesus had done.
She went and told those who had been with him and who were mourning and weeping.
By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau in regard to their future.
kill
Long ago, the old days, the past
squeeze
Without delay he called them, and they left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men and followed him.
Hundred
The kamiara chicken is large and tall.
A person who is cheerful is quick to laugh if he/she sees his/her companion(s). It's like he/she has no worries.
A bodyguard.
On hearing this, Pilate asked if the man was a Galilean.
"No one knows about that day or hour, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.
They came to Bethsaida, and some people brought a blind man and begged Jesus to touch him.
Sugar
not at all meaning the people of this world who are immoral, or the greedy and swindlers, or idolaters. In that case you would have to leave this world.
Here he is, speaking publicly, and they are not saying a word to him. Have the authorities really concluded that he is the Christ ?
What shall we say, then? Shall we go on sinning so that grace may increase?
The rest seized his servants, mistreated them and killed them.
A person in our place who is lazy, we call a lazy (lit. inadequately cooked person because there isn’t any work he knows how to do. He has ability but doesn’t use it.
We write this to make our joy complete.
Something placed here and there
constipated
And this is my prayer: that your love may abound more and more in knowledge and depth of insight,
Candy was used to pacify the child who was crying.
But since they have no root, they last only a short time. When trouble or persecution comes because of the word, they quickly fall away.
But I have had God's help to this very day, and so I stand here and testify to small and great alike. I am saying nothing beyond what the prophets and Moses said would happen--
The person who is still tentatively planning, he is still merely thinking about making a field where there is a mature secondary forest.
And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit.
Regarding a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space
And with many other words John exhorted the people and proclaimed the good news to them.
take a step
Instead, you yourselves cheat and do wrong, and you do this to your brothers and sisters.
As for a corn field, that is exclusively corn.
So he started out, and on his way he met an Ethiopian eunuch, an important official in charge of all the treasury of the Kandake (which means “queen of the Ethiopians”). This man had gone to Jerusalem to worship,  and on his way home was sitting in his chariot reading the Book of Isaiah the prophet.
A companion, neighbor, or other person
Tie or lock up things tightly
to become dismantled or come apart
The lastborn is the final offspring; she will not bear children again.
This is the message we have heard from him and declare to you: God is light; in him there is no darkness at all.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, so that each of us may receive what is due us for the things done while in the body, whether good or bad.
where for forty days he was tempted by the devil. He ate nothing during those days, and at the end of them he was hungry.
your kingdom come, your will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.
To growl
dialect variant of boyow
Chair or place to sit
shallow glass bowls
Freckle
that all of them may be one, Father, just as you are in me and I am in you. May they also be in us so that the world may believe that you have sent me.
Do we, then, nullify the law by this faith? Not at all! Rather, we uphold the law.
plant seedlings of tobacco or papaya.
small red bird, about the size of a sparrow
The eye cannot say to the hand, "I don't need you!" And the head cannot say to the feet, "I don't need you!"
"You heard me say, 'I am going away and I am coming back to you.' If you loved me, you would be glad that I am going to the Father, for the Father is greater than I.
They shouted back, "No, not him! Give us Barabbas!" Now Barabbas had taken part in a rebellion.
They have made a commitment  [to each other] because their affections are the same. They have come to agreement with each other. They desire each other. The attraction between the two of them is mutual.
One hundred
to intentionally unravel something
Material used for making mats.
part
Even though we speak like this, dear friends, we are confident of better things in your case--things that accompany salvation.
As for the flesh of large fish, the bones can be filleted; the bones are removed.
We bite into and chew off corn, mangos, pangi fruit, papaya and pineapple.
One Sabbath Jesus was going through the grainfields, and as his disciples walked along, they began to pick some heads of grain.
To split open, as of dry soil.
swing by one’s hands from a tree vine
Meanwhile, the high priest questioned Jesus about his disciples and his teaching.
An Ata Manobo term for the cross-like symbol also called a kinurus.
his work will be shown for what it is, because the Day will bring it to light. It will be revealed with fire, and the fire will test the quality of each man's work.
He said to his disciples, "Why are you so afraid? Do you still have no faith?"
For God, who was at work in Peter as an apostle to the circumcised, was also at work in me as an apostle to the Gentiles.
To allow oneself to do or experience something
Abandon your husband because he is unable to provide for you because he will not work.
carry on
strap
He/she is easily upset.
If we are careful about our conduct, our lives will be orderly.
As it was in the days of Noah, so it will be at the coming of the Son of Man.
rub something between the hands
walk hunched over
Peter said to him, “We have left all we had to follow you!”
“You don’t know what you are asking,” Jesus said to them. “Can you drink the cup I am going to drink?” “We can,” they answered.
The child will smother if it gets covered over with the cradle cloth.
Then God's temple in heaven was opened, and within his temple was seen the ark of his covenant. And there came flashes of lightning, rumblings, peals of thunder, an earthquake and a great hailstorm.
So then, my brothers, when you come together to eat, wait for each other.
Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
The people of Jerusalem and their rulers did not recognize Jesus, yet in condemning him they fulfilled the words of the prophets that are read every Sabbath.
tasteless, flavorless
When two days of this process has been completed, finally that agkud can be eaten.
He is always turning over because his pain is excessive.
So he reasoned in the synagogue with both Jews and God-fearing Greeks, as well as in the marketplace day by day with those who happened to be there.
string of kuglung made from a philidendra root
lean away
No matter how much money you are short , you are the one who will decide how much money to give [to me].
“Lord,” they answered, “we want our sight.”
If I am speaking and there is a person who interrupts my speech, he messes it up. If someone overrides [another's words] with his words, it is disrespectful
But the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; in those days they will fast."
Spirit dog said to bark at night
correct answer to a riddle.
night, darkness
She had suffered a great deal under the care of many doctors and had spent all she had, yet instead of getting better she grew worse.
and said, “Everyone brings out the choice wine first and then the cheaper wine after the guests have had too much to drink; but you have saved the best till now.”
We rebuke them with, “What are you whispering about? Go to sleep now because it is already late at night.”
The brightness of a glow is faint.
Still others asked, "How can the Christ come from Galilee? Does not the Scripture say that the Christ will come from David's family and from Bethlehem, the town where David lived?"
I am telling you what I have seen in the Father's presence, and you do what you have heard from your father. "
Those were the animals God forbade them to eat.
thief
Evil spirit
For this reason I, Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus for the sake of you Gentiles—
When we work, we [should] do what we do wholeheartedly.
Middle, or center
We eat salad raw.
find
To move very close
Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
The Lord’s hand was with them, and a great number of people believed and turned to the Lord.
If we inadvertently brush against the table as we pass, it is jostled because it was moved
Then the King will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father; take your inheritance, the kingdom prepared for you since the creation of the world.
The moon goes over the horizon; it disappears.
I ask you to receive her in the Lord in a way worthy of his people and to give her any help she may need from you, for she has been the benefactor of many people, including me.
Wood-stem, glossy-leafed plant.
It has wide leaves which extend in a straight line from the body of that kapigsula tree.
He is before all things, and in him all things hold together.
For those who exalt themselves will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted.
Small container
The day which will arrive, that is tomorrow.
Tenth
here were [some] people who were putting shelled corn in a sack and they were packing it down with a pestle to compress it so that the corn would be tightly compressed in the sack.
It is difficult for a person to cross the swift bubbly current of a river.
To scoop with both hands cupped
infected teeth from not brushing
conical-shaped fish trap made of smooth bamboo strips
To disturb or butt up against something
Let this Christ, this King of Israel, come down now from the cross, that we may see and believe." Those crucified with him also heaped insults on him.
Dear friend, I pray that you may enjoy good health and that all may go well with you, even as your soul is getting along well.
travel against the wind whether on a river, lake, or ocean.
Jesus replied, “Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah, for this was not revealed to you by flesh and blood, but by my Father in heaven.
Speak louder so that the others can hear well.
Water which does not flow has been dammed up.
travel directly to one’s destination without delay
The rest said, “Now leave him alone. Let’s see if Elijah comes to save him.”
Enough.
We’ve returned
His father was sick in bed, suffering from fever and dysentery. Paul went in to see him and, after prayer, placed his hands on him and healed him.
Coconut wine
The person who builds a house always pounds nail(s ) with a hammer.
"Who is he, sir?" the man asked. "Tell me so that I may believe in him."
But Peter declared, “Even if I have to die with you, I will never disown you.” And all the other disciples said the same.
As for a person who stutters, his speaking is not straight.
Large crowds were traveling with Jesus, and turning to them he said:
She happens to come when we’re eating.
He told them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed, which a man took and planted in his field.  Though it is the smallest of all seeds, yet when it grows, it is the largest of garden plants and becomes a tree, so that the birds come and perch in its branches.”
“How will this be,” Mary asked the angel, “since I am a virgin?”
We worship God.
When evening came, many who were demon-possessed were brought to him, and he drove out the spirits with a word and healed all the sick.
Anyone who rejected the law of Moses died without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses.
But the ship struck a sandbar and ran aground. The bow stuck fast and would not move, and the stern was broken to pieces by the pounding of the surf.
reversed
And what we have said is even more clear if another priest like Melchizedek appears,
His acquaintance subtracted three hundred pesos. The money which arrived,  was only two hundred [pesos].
When a piglet nurses, it is always pumping the breasts of the mother so that they will fill with milk.
When it rains, we break/cut off leaves for a head covering.
female of animal, bird, or other creature
I am jealous for you with a godly jealousy. I promised you to one husband, to Christ, so that I might present you as a pure virgin to him.
Jesus returned to Galilee in the power of the Spirit, and news about him spread through the whole countryside.
But if she does, she must remain unmarried or else be reconciled to her husband. And a husband must not divorce his wife.
To break (glass, water pole, cooking pot)
A spur on the leg of a hen or rooster.
To pant from exertion, be out of breath.
His disciples remembered that it is written: “Zeal for your house will consume me.”
Someone who is cutting lengths of langilan wood for a roof.
After this the Lord appointed seventy-two others and sent them two by two ahead of him to every town and place where he was about to go.
For our light and momentary troubles are achieving for us an eternal glory that far outweighs them all.
To line up one after another
If there are two people who are going downriver by raft and one goes ahead of the other, the one left behind will chase the one which got ahead and will catch up with him.
Lightning
“I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.”
"Father, the time has come. Glorify your Son, that your Son may glorify you. For you granted him authority over all people that he might give eter
the part of one's being that acts in dreams
pinch and pull someone
cook by boiling in water
Made of rocks such as a stone wall.
For I do not do the good I want to do, but the evil I do not want to do—this I keep on doing.
Strand
edible beach plant
For every house is built by someone, but God is the builder of everything.
from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who was killed between the altar and the sanctuary. Yes, I tell you, this generation will be held responsible for it all.
When I was on the beach, I was caught by the wind of a strong whirlwind.
They have told the church about your love. You will do well to send them on their way in a manner worthy of God.
Under what circumstances was it credited? Was it after he was circumcised, or before? It was not after, but before!
deeply affected
Have nothing to do with godless myths and old wives’ tales; rather, train yourself to be godly.
(They had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian in the city with Paul and assumed that Paul had brought him into the temple area.)
be carried by the wind or become airborne
have the appearance of something
Barbs
ill-mannered woman
We are [deliberately] abandoning [our offspring].
The husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife, and likewise the wife to her husband.
forbid
The sun is setting when it goes past the mountain as it is disappearing over the horizon.
A field house (in addition to main house in the village.)
stay just one night at some location,
and they asked each other, "Who will roll the stone away from the entrance of the tomb?" But when they looked up, they saw that the stone, which was very large, had been rolled away.
While Jesus was still speaking, someone came from the house of Jairus, the synagogue leader. “Your daughter is dead,” he said. “Don’t bother the teacher anymore.”
And they stayed continually at the temple, praising God.
Plant with white flowers that glow at night
Jesus said to the servants, “Fill the jars with water”; so they filled them to the brim.
sleep deeply
mash or pulverize.
Tree with small edible fruits
The child has contracted chickenpox.
The river will flood.
Look, your house is left to you desolate.
small, round bean
Again, the devil took him to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their splendor.
mud fish
But a Samaritan, as he traveled, came where the man was; and when he saw him, he took pity on him.
Uncle
Word used when bouncing a baby
To rest.
So I will cast her on a bed of suffering, and I will make those who commit adultery with her suffer intensely, unless they repent of her ways.
To become flavorful
Soon afterward, Jesus went to a town called Nain, and his disciples and a large crowd went along with him.
They mimic us when we talk.
to rot from water
They tie up heavy, cumbersome loads and put them on other people’s shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them.
to wrinkle one's forehead (when worried or angry)
Mary stayed with Elizabeth for about three months and then returned home.
When we catch large fish, we roast some until partially cooked so that it will become stiff and not be wasted.
one-stringed violin
Whoever has ears, let them hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one who is victorious, I will give some of the hidden manna. I will also give that person a white stone with a new name written on it, known only to the one who receives it.
“But very truly I tell you, it is for your good that I am going away. Unless I go away, the Advocate will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you.”
become stiff
young featherless chicken slow to grow feathers
Jesus, knowing that they intended to come and make him king by force, withdrew again to a mountain by himself.
The one who sent me is with me; he has not left me alone, for I always do what pleases him."
To look down, around or back and forth
After the reading from the Law and the Prophets, the leaders of the synagogue sent word to them, saying, “Brothers, if you have a word of exhortation for the people, please speak.”
The word ngadngad means “press and rub against,” which happens when a bolo is pressed against a sharpening stone.
We have become white-headed from grey hairs.
It will be good for those servants whose master finds them watching when he comes. I tell you the truth, he will dress himself to serve, will have them recline at the table and will come and wait on them. It will be good for those servants whose master finds them ready, even if he comes in the second or third watch of the night.
wire
Also a dispute arose among them as to which of them was considered to be greatest.
And the second is like it: ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’
remember
and with your feet fitted with the readiness that comes from the gospel of peace.
Tightly woven rattan container with a lid.
A weight; on a net or fishing line; an anchor.
But if our unrighteousness brings out God’s righteousness more clearly, what shall we say? That God is unjust in bringing his wrath on us? (I am using a human argument.)
breakfast
Be that as it may, I have not been a burden to you. Yet, crafty fellow that I am, I caught you by trickery!
He has delivered us from such a deadly peril, and he will deliver us. On him we have set our hope that he will continue to deliver us,
guitar pick.
and he went back inside the palace. “Where do you come from?” he asked Jesus, but Jesus gave him no answer.
The holes of the marmot’s mound is connected underneath to the places where they make their nests
They were saddened, and one by one they said to him, "Surely not I?"
peckled chicken
The elder, To my dear friend Gaius, whom I love in the truth.
It’s Andì’s fault that I suffer injury when I go on an errand for them and come across a murderer.
Mosquito.
Terrified at her torment, they will stand far off and cry: “ ‘Woe! Woe to you, great city, you mighty city of Babylon! In one hour your doom has come!’
attend spirit ceremony
To wear a sarong loosely draped over the shoulders as a protection from the cold.
As for the rice plant, it naturally spreads out at the base.
They will pile the wood on the rack.
But, dear friends, remember what the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ foretold.
The person who has been robbed of possessions and money, he curses the person who has robbed him by [saying], “You person with bad conduct should die.”
For I was hungry and you gave me nothing to eat, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink,
So I say, live by the Spirit, and you will not gratify the desires of the sinful nature.
Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
You have persevered and have endured hardships for my name, and have not grown weary.
Veins, of a leaf
to be emotionally strong
to start to crack or break the soil as camotes growing under the surface
The pig which I am giving to you is being used to open the door to inquiry to jog your memory if you have forgotten that which is mine that is, an unpaid debt for help with a bride price?
But I ask: Did they not hear? Of course they did: “Their voice has gone out into all the earth, their words to the ends of the world.”
tend
As for the body of a ship, the bow, that is what goes first.
very good; made very well
burn snails
Judah the father of Perez and Zerah, whose mother was Tamar, Perez the father of Hezron, Hezron the father of Ram,
To be effective.
a pattern on carved combs
For where two or three gather in my name, there am I with them.”
burnt
To call the evil spirits to aid one.
And at the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a loud voice, "Eloi, Eloi, lama 1503 sabachthani?"--which means, "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"
Do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. Rather, be afraid of the One who can destroy both soul and body in hell.
To tease
deep pool in a creek
But I want you to know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins.” So he said to the paralyzed man, “I tell you, get up, take your mat and go home.”
Therefore, as it is written: "Let him who boasts boast in the Lord."
Dear children, this is the last hour; and as you have heard that the antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have come. This is how we know it is the last hour.
Sonny, chase away the chickens which are eating the rice which is being dried in the sun.
whirlpool
No one who lives in him keeps on sinning. No one who continues to sin has either seen him or known him.
Thigh
Benita was a childbride.
After this I looked, and there before me was a door standing open in heaven. And the voice I had first heard speaking to me like a trumpet said, "Come up here, and I will show you what must take place after this."
They ran throughout that whole region and carried the sick on mats to wherever they heard he was.
and put it at the apostles’ feet, and it was distributed to anyone who had need.
Their teaching will spread like gangrene. Among them are Hymenaeus and Philetus,
Brothers, I do not consider myself yet to have taken hold of it. But one thing I do: Forgetting what is behind and straining toward what is ahead,
Please estimate [about how much we need] also for our breakfast. please.
Wattle of chicken (red part at chin).
bird
It is as though [something] triggers our thinking.
Wherever there is a carcass, there the vultures will gather.
If a flower has not yet opened, it is still closed.
point out
“This is the Moses who told the Israelites, ‘God will raise up for you a prophet like me from your own people.’
Many, as of a wriggling mass
Armed warriors
zither
And being in anguish, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was like drops of blood falling to the ground.
If a person forces someone down, he will press and rub their head against the ground.
Then I heard a voice from heaven say, “Write this: Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on.” “Yes,” says the Spirit, “they will rest from their labor, for their deeds will follow them.”
The children are being taught so that they will have skills.
"Blessed is the king who comes in the name of the Lord!" "Peace in heaven and glory in the highest!"
eggbeater
Therefore everyone who hears these words of mine and puts them into practice is like a wise man who built his house on the rock.
camote leaves
To wash face
rare type of metal bracelet made by the older people which has indentations as decoration
to poison fish with the fruit of the lagtang vine
Children, obey your parents in everything, for this pleases the Lord.
Impatient
slide down a tree
Therefore we are always confident and know that as long as we are at home in the body we are away from the Lord.
expression of regret.
The following day he arrived in Caesarea. Cornelius was expecting them and had called together his relatives and close friends.
milk
Such "wisdom" does not come down from heaven but is earthly, unspiritual, of the devil.
small crab
eat
The flesh and bones of the tail of animals or reptiles.
If a sack of rice is divided by three, there will be three equal portions.
So will it be with the resurrection of the dead. The body that is sown is perishable, it is raised imperishable;
So Peter and the other disciple started for the tomb.
Whatever is added to food, it is also that which is added to food.
grain similar to rice
Shaman, one who contacts the spirit world.
to wrap up and bind together
Paul, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and our brother Sosthenes,
To smear
One of those listening was a woman from the city of Thyatira named Lydia, a dealer in purple cloth. She was a worshiper of God. The Lord opened her heart to respond to Paul’s message.
lymph nodes in the neck, armpit, or groin
When there are many people, we have to squeeze in and out to get by.
For it is time for judgment to begin with the family of God; and if it begins with us, what will the outcome be for those who do not obey the gospel of God?
You will roll them up like a robe; like a garment they will be changed. But you remain the same, and your years will never end.”
John answered, “Anyone who has two shirts should share with the one who has none, and anyone who has food should do the same.”
Mary stayed for a short time because she joined [them] for only one night.
A sieve
Two men, Moses and Elijah, appeared in glorious splendor, talking with Jesus.
Be mindful to give rice to our neighbors.
have someone curl one’s hair
"If, while we seek to be justified in Christ, it becomes evident that we ourselves are sinners, does that mean that Christ promotes sin? Absolutely not!
I rejoiced greatly in the Lord that at last you renewed your concern for me. Indeed, you were concerned, but you had no opportunity to show it.
This week at the end?? of May, I would like to try to return to Maambago, but the fares to the vehicles have gone up.
Jesus answered, “Everyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again,
We have a small child [whose] age is about one year.
The child's legs were spread apart as he/she was sitting.
Speaking nonsense
Short and squat
We want each of you to show this same diligence to the very end, in order to make your hope sure.
But go, tell his disciples and Peter, 'He is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see him, just as he told you.' "
The second
Same
Still another said, "I will follow you, Lord; but first let me go back and say good-by to my family."
“Don’t collect any more than you are required to,” he told them.
"If you are the Christ, " they said, "tell us."
When the sun is hidden by clouds
Then he adds: "Their sins and lawless acts I will remember no more."
But he said to me, "Do not do it! I am a fellow servant with you and with your brothers the prophets and of all who keep the words of this book. Worship God!"
He is coming with Onesimus, our faithful and dear brother, who is one of you. They will tell you everything that is happening here.
What grieved them most was his statement that they would never see his face again. Then they accompanied him to the ship.
to make sluggish; to give a drugged effect
and constant friction between people of corrupt mind, who have been robbed of the truth and who think that godliness is a means to financial gain.
What’s the matter with you?
side by side
So when the Samaritans came to him, they urged him to stay with them, and he stayed two days.
eavesdrop
Extra
Now about the dead rising--have you not read in the book of Moses, in the account of the bush, how God said to him, 'I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob' ?
After all this had happened, Paul decided to go to Jerusalem, passing through Macedonia and Achaia. "After I have been there," he said, "I must visit Rome also."
To cluster around and lean toward each other (huddle)
For it is God's will that by doing good you should silence the ignorant talk of foolish men.
I was personally unknown to the churches of Judea that are in Christ.
I praise you for remembering me in everything and for holding to the traditions just as I passed them on to you.
A baby monkey.
Tie-string of a bolo
wood or debris left behind by water
flesh
The people who digs sweet potatoes, will dump the sweet potatoes into the water because they will wash them first.
All the Law and the Prophets hang on these two commandments.”
Let no one in the field go back to get his cloak.
Don't continually be staying out late at night at some other house where there are young unmarried ladies.
Moreover, we have all had human fathers who disciplined us and we respected them for it. How much more should we submit to the Father of our spirits and live!
The one who was affected [by his action] -- was directed at -- was her husband who was murdered.
But Scripture has locked up everything under the control of sin, so that what was promised, being given through faith in Jesus Christ, might be given to those who believe.
For God does not show favoritism.
Take your pay and go. I want to give the one who was hired last the same as I gave you.
For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
"We heard him say, 'I will destroy this man-made temple and in three days will build another, not made by man.' "
For false messiahs and false prophets will appear and perform great signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, even the elect.
My bolo won’t cut.
to play a kobbiung
Nor can the gift of God be compared with the result of one man’s sin: The judgment followed one sin and brought condemnation, but the gift followed many trespasses and brought justification.
raider
Everyone was filled with awe at the many wonders and signs performed by the apostles.
The tails of the piglets wiggle as they move about.
‘Look, you scoffers, wonder and perish, for I am going to do something in your days that you would never believe, even if someone told you.’”
you (singular, oblique pronoun)
put away
Great great grandparent
The person who is quick to get tired of his work, he will be slow to finish the house he is building
At his gate was laid a beggar named Lazarus, covered with sores
Fearful,
Be like
Chickenpox.
On the eighth day, when it was time to circumcise the child, he was named Jesus, the name the angel had given him before he was conceived.
When he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to shout, "Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!"
If you are worried about something, you will be disturbed if somone asks you
He touched her hand and the fever left her, and she got up and began to wait on him.
So he got up, took the child and his mother and went to the land of Israel.
Indeed Herod and Pontius Pilate met together with the Gentiles and the people of Israel in this city to conspire against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed.
If anyone is hungry, he should eat at home, so that when you meet together it may not result in judgment. And when I come I will give further directions.
They cut the meat up and divided it between themselves, and then they had the person who carried the pig on his back take the head for himself.
Jesus replied, "The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.
That which triggered grief in the mother of the child who had died was when she saw the ID of her child.
Whatever medicine is effective against an illness, that is strong medicine.
Host
"Beware of the teachers of the law. They like to walk around in flowing robes and love to be greeted in the marketplaces and have the most important seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets.
[Speak] louder when you speak so that the others can hear
I am sending him--who is my very heart--back to you.
As for those who were held in high esteem—whatever they were makes no difference to me; God does not show favoritism—they added nothing to my message.
The Jews gathered around him, saying, "How long will you keep us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly."
Soft soil.
Cut the edge smooth.
If this man were not from God, he could do nothing."
to become frustrated
Therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. “He put mud on my eyes,” the man replied, “and I washed, and now I see.”
There are seven day(s) in a week.
You will conceive and give birth to a son, and you are to call him Jesus.
The leaders are having a discussion about whether there will be requests for reimbursement of a brideprice.
Finger (person, crab, shrimp)
When Simon Peter saw this, he fell at Jesus’ knees and said, “Go away from me, Lord; I am a sinful man!”
An awl
Grandparent
But they were childless because Elizabeth was not able to conceive, and they were both very old.
No longer will a man teach his neighbor, or a man his brother, saying, 'Know the Lord,' because they will all know me, from the least of them to the greatest.
See to it, then, that the light within you is not darkness.
bathe oneself
To push, as a drawer, bench, chair, table
There were many lamps in the upstairs room where we were meeting.
Now
yawn
pick for strumming a stringed instrument
squeeze
The pogul wood will break the frying pan.
To finish
meaning
Loosely woven, not close together
look back over one’s shoulder
A certain ruler asked him, “Good teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
Let us rejoice and be glad and give him glory! For the wedding of the Lamb has come, and his bride has made herself ready.
When she recognized Peter’s voice, she was so overjoyed she ran back without opening it and exclaimed, “Peter is at the door!”
Small offspring.
cut
And my God will meet all your needs according to his glorious riches in Christ Jesus.
Dear friends, this is now my second letter to you. I have written both of them as reminders to stimulate you to wholesome thinking.
edible climbing plant with leaves similar to sayote
He began by saying to them, “Today this scripture is fulfilled in your hearing.”
You snakes! You brood of vipers! How will you escape being condemned to hell?
Then Jesus began to denounce the towns in which most of his miracles had been performed, because they did not repent.
Hold back
Time of cutting rice field
An inlet [of water] at the ocean, if it has no outlet, it is an inlet which [forms] a lake.
In the same way, on the outside you appear to people as righteous but on the inside you are full of hypocrisy and wickedness.
to fondle a baby
For I tell you, you will not see me again until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.’”
The liver wasn’t cooked by boiling in water lest it would fall apart.
widow
Through him everyone who believes is set free from every sin, a justification you were not able to obtain under the law of Moses.
Split wood
As a result, it has become clear throughout the whole palace guard and to everyone else that I am in chains for Christ.
The disciples said to him, “If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.”
yell in triumph
All of us also lived among them at one time, gratifying the cravings of our flesh and following its desires and thoughts. Like the rest, we were by nature deserving of wrath.
to look around for another husband, flirt while married
Two other men, both criminals, were also led out with him to be executed.
As for a skeleton, it is all the bones [of the body] which are not disconnected (lit. separated) from the head, neck, upper arm(s), body which has ribs, thighs and feet [lit. foot] and toes/fingers.
Tree root used to increase mother’s milk
always, continually
Very early in the morning
A spirit seizes him and he suddenly screams; it throws him into convulsions so that he foams at the mouth. It scarcely ever leaves him and is destroying him.
(They still did not understand from Scripture that Jesus had to rise from the dead.)
beads, necklace
This is the one about whom it is written: ‘I will send my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way before you.’
girl.
He said to them, "But now if you have a purse, take it, and also a bag; and if you don't have a sword, sell your cloak and buy one.
So they asked him, "What miraculous sign then will you give that we may see it and believe you? What will you do?
Consider Abraham: "He believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness."
I crush the lice between my fingernails.
Anyone you forgive, I also forgive. And what I have forgiven—if there was anything to forgive—I have forgiven in the sight of Christ for your sake,
However, do not rejoice that the spirits submit to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven.”
flame up, as fire when fanned
the reason for something
The people who lived long ago, they still wore g-strings because they didn't yet have very much material.
expose to heat
Tightly woven rattan container with a lid.
I am the Living One; I was dead, and now look, I am alive for ever and ever! And I hold the keys of death and Hades.
They show that the requirements of the law are written on their hearts, their consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts sometimes accusing them and at other times even defending them.)
What shall we say, then? Is the law sinful? Certainly not! Nevertheless, I would not have known what sin was had it not been for the law. For I would not have known what coveting really was if the law had not said, “You shall not covet.”
We are not treated well by the people because our advantage (lit. value) in having wood has gone to them.
As Jesus walked beside the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and his brother Andrew casting a net into the lake, for they were fishermen.
Then they said, "Why do we need any more testimony? We have heard it from his own lips."
Consider therefore the kindness and sternness of God: sternness to those who fell, but kindness to you, provided that you continue in his kindness. Otherwise, you also will be cut off.
Play ghost
hold
It's ripening is lacking; it’s not yet filled in.
When some of those standing near heard this, they said, "Listen, he's calling Elijah.
straighten out legs when sitting or lying.
For Macedonia and Achaia were pleased to make a contribution for the poor among the saints in Jerusalem.
Therefore, since through God's mercy we have this ministry, we do not lose heart.
Jesus said to them, “Bring some of the fish you have just caught.”
He said to them: “You are well aware that it is against our law for a Jew to associate with or visit a Gentile. But God has shown me that I should not call anyone impure or unclean.
Milk
Jesus answered, “It is written: ‘Man shall not live on bread alone, but on every word that comes from the mouth of God.’”
smart
And even the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
dible greens.
Lamet; a type of song sung to the dead.
walking stick;
To discuss marriage arrangements
Regarding if we had a friend with whom we had a good relationship but if [someone sings] his song but he is no longer on earth, you will be caused to think about him when you hear that song [which he used to sing] when he was still alive.
include
spirit
As for a side stream of a river, there is an outlet downriver.
Leaving Nazareth, he went and lived in Capernaum, which was by the lake in the area of Zebulun and Naphtali—
Do not let anyone who delights in false humility and the worship of angels disqualify you for the prize. Such a person goes into great detail about what he has seen, and his unspiritual mind puffs him up with idle notions.
I did not see a temple in the city, because the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are its temple.
If any of you lacks wisdom, you should ask God, who gives generously to all without finding fault, and it will be given to you.
As for the Visayan's cross-like symbol, it just has one crosspiece and the purpose is to ward off evil spirits.
He just [purposely] forgets it; he doesn't pay attention to it.
a forest plant used as a treatment for blighted fields when burned
Brothers, do not slander one another. Anyone who speaks against his brother or judges him speaks against the law and judges it. When you judge the law, you are not keeping it, but sitting in judgment on it.
village, barrio, or its inhabitants
When the apostles returned, they reported to Jesus what they had done. Then he took them with him and they withdrew by themselves to a town called Bethsaida,
tarp
An orchid.
"But when the tenants saw him, they talked the matter over. 'This is the heir,' they said. 'Let's kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.'
I'm going to ask how much she will have [me] give her in return
begin
It was just before the Passover Festival. Jesus knew that the hour had come for him to leave this world and go to the Father. Having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end.
shouting, "Men of Israel, help us! This is the man who teaches all men everywhere against our people and our law and this place. And besides, he has brought Greeks into the temple area and defiled this holy place."
hate
to fulfill what was said through the prophet Isaiah:
But Peter followed him at a distance, right up to the courtyard of the high priest. He entered and sat down with the guards to see the outcome.
Lumber
To attach firmly
On the third day a wedding took place at Cana in Galilee. Jesus’ mother was there,
If you are enticed to sin, you are being deceived.
If I have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have a faith that can move mountains, but have not love, I am nothing.
Luluy has decayed teeth.
After he took him aside, away from the crowd, Jesus put his fingers into the man's ears. Then he spit and touched the man's tongue.
Whoever has accepted it has certified that God is truthful.
If we are guests, it depends whether we tell the host how many days before he will let us return home.
He said to them, "Make every effort to enter through the narrow door, because many, I tell you, will try to enter and will not be able to. Once the owner of the house gets up and closes the door, you will stand outside knocking and pleading, 'Sir, open the door for us.' "But he will answer, 'I don't know you or where you come from.'
rub off, as kernels of corn; fall out, as baby teeth
One says, “Usi, let's wrestle.” The other says, “Yes, let’s wrestle,” and so then they wrestle with each other.
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Another reason I wrote you was to see if you would stand the test and be obedient in everything.
I tell you the truth, the man who does not enter the sheep pen by the gate, but climbs in by some other way, is a thief and a robber
But the Pharisee, noticing that Jesus did not first wash before the meal, was surprised.
He threw himself at Jesus’ feet and thanked him—and he was a Samaritan.
When did we see you a stranger and invite you in, or needing clothes and clothe you?
That is why I was angry with that generation; I said, ‘Their hearts are always going astray, and they have not known my ways.’
To encourage
heat water
For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him,
come here
He entered the house of God, and taking the consecrated bread, he ate what is lawful only for priests to eat. And he also gave some to his companions.”
Spleen; term of address to a woman by a man.
When they kept on questioning him, he straightened up and said to them, “Let any one of you who is without sin be the first to throw a stone at her.”
Adaw was slashed with a bolo.
briefly or superficially
Edge of the waterfall.
Moistened lime
Come to an end
To be excited as someone about to ride in an airplane for the first time
Be slow to carry out an activity or fulfill a request
for they have shed the blood of your saints and prophets, and you have given them blood to drink as they deserve."
Kind of bolo
They had breastplates like breastplates of iron, and the sound of their wings was like the thundering of many horses and chariots rushing into battle.
Blessed is the one whose sin the Lord will never count against them.”
Having dark holes
but Paul did not think it wise to take him, because he had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not continued with them in the work.
It is shameful even to mention what the disobedient do in secret.
The body is a unit, though it is made up of many parts; and though all its parts are many, they form one body. So it is with Christ.
Nor did he enter heaven to offer himself again and again, the way the high priest enters the Most Holy Place every year with blood that is not his own.
Do not conform to the pattern of this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind. Then you will be able to test and approve what God’s will is—his good, pleasing and perfect will.
The man who saw it has given testimony, and his testimony is true. He knows that he tells the truth, and he testifies so that you also may believe.
I urged Titus to go to you and I sent our brother with him. Titus did not exploit you, did he? Did we not walk in the same footsteps by the same Spirit?
friendship name
A kind of black rice.
To be lifted off (by wind)
Therefore, my brothers, be eager to prophesy, and do not forbid speaking in tongues.
crow.
We build a fire there in the middle of the cornfield and put the fruit of the hot peppers into the fire.
wealthy
Ugly
because his only daughter, a girl of about twelve, was dying. As Jesus was on his way, the crowds almost crushed him.
The fifth angel poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast, and its kingdom was plunged into darkness. People gnawed their tongues in agony
see hagamhagam (worrying)
Just one
“Sir,” the woman said, “you have nothing to draw with and the well is deep. Where can you get this living water?
to wrap something around something else, as a bandage
Position of the sun (9-11 AM or 1-3 PM)
Don’t go alone to mingle with a crowd, lest you get lost in the crowd.
The Spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are God’s children.
To trigger off
I was disappointed since I thought I would be given some.
The older sibling has the younger sibling lead on the trail.
They marched across the breadth of the earth and surrounded the camp of God's people, the city he loves. But fire came down from heaven and devoured them.
Stir what is being dried in the sun so that it will become dry.
prediction
Pilate had a notice prepared and fastened to the cross. It read: JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Unlike so many, we do not peddle the word of God for profit. On the contrary, in Christ we speak before God with sincerity, as those sent from God.
smother
to be fed up
The rats will propagate; it mated with another rat which was not the same as itself.
[Some manuscripts include: “For the Son of Man came to save what was lost.”]
For this reason, when I could stand it no longer, I sent to find out about your faith. I was afraid that in some way the tempter had tempted you and that our labors might have been in vain.
In fact, everyone who wants to live a godly life in Christ Jesus will be persecuted,
But the ministry Jesus has received is as superior to theirs as the covenant of which he is mediator is superior to the old one, and it is founded on better promises.
“It is my judgment, therefore, that we should not make it difficult for the Gentiles who are turning to God.
See that the windows are shut in case it should rain.
I've become tired of your conduct of habitual ?? Drinking
Small
So was fulfilled what was spoken through the prophet: “I will open my mouth in parables, I will utter things hidden since the creation of the world.”
Very slowly
forgive
If there is someone who collects payment for a horse but it has been sold on credit, the one who has received the horse can use anything for payment.
become warm and prickly
treacherous, rash, conceited, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God—
forget
Then he said to them, “My soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death. Stay here and keep watch with me.”
sturdy
Name of a village named after a stream.
It would be better for them to be thrown into the sea with a millstone tied around their neck than to cause one of these little ones to stumble.
Jesus answered, "The work of God is this: to believe in the one he has sent."
As it is, it is no longer I myself who do it, but it is sin living in me.
So therefore the owner took back the mother pig.
Have pity on me.
We were surprised at Amutatoy.
More than forty men were involved in this plot.
place near coals until partially roasted and dry as method of preservation.
Tell
Then Paul, knowing that some of them were Sadducees and the others Pharisees, called out in the Sanhedrin, “My brothers, I am a Pharisee, descended from Pharisees. I stand on trial because of the hope of the resurrection of the dead.”
For I am the least of the apostles and do not even deserve to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.
When the chief priests had met with the elders and devised a plan, they gave the soldiers a large sum of money,
When the sun sets, it begins to become dark.
rap or tap with one’s hand or a bolo
prep by
To dance a baby by its hands
First to those in Damascus, then to those in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and to the Gentiles also, I preached that they should repent and turn to God and prove their repentance by their deeds.
To cross
Your face is like a payow.
communicate with spirits
Is this our chicken?
Tychicus, the dear brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will tell you everything, so that you also may know how I am and what I am doing.
take a holiday or vacation
refuge
“Again, you have heard that it was said to the people long ago, ‘Do not break your oath, but fulfill to the Lord the vows you have made.’
It is written: ‘And he was numbered with the transgressors and I tell you that this must be fulfilled in me. Yes, what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment. Those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads and saying, "So! You who are going to destroy the temple and build it in three days,
Squelch someone in conversation
In the same way, the women are to be worthy of respect, not malicious talkers but temperate and trustworthy in everything.
We'll be poisoned or hexed.
To ring, as of a bell.
one (used in counting)
Not only that, but Rebekah’s children were conceived at the same time by our father Isaac.  Yet, before the twins were born or had done anything good or bad—in order that God’s purpose in election might stand:
The woman fled into the wilderness to a place prepared for her by God, where she might be taken care of for 1,260 days.
“Sanctify them by the truth; your word is truth.”
kind of basket (liang) woven by strands of three and has a pattern on four sides.
He will not be strong unless he is playing.
I am glad I can have complete confidence in you.
And being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to death-- even death on a cross!
And so from this one man, and he as good as dead, came descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and as countless as the sand on the seashore.
and saw the Lord speaking. 'Quick!' he said to me. 'Leave Jerusalem immediately, because they will not accept your testimony about me.'
with respect to
Again I ask: Did they stumble so as to fall beyond recovery? Not at all! Rather, because of their transgression, salvation has come to the Gentiles to make Israel envious.
To spur a horse with one's heels so it will run
excert effort
Because it was the Jewish day of Preparation and since the tomb was nearby, they laid Jesus there.
to be set free or released from captivity
give two things together
comb design
advice or teaching
As they were walking along the road, a man said to him, "I will follow you wherever you go."
for true and just are his judgments. He has condemned the great prostitute who corrupted the earth by her adulteries. He has avenged on her the blood of his servants.”
Give us today our daily bread.
Estimate the length of the dress.
Dogs, when they are itching, they scratch with their feet.
There is great value if we obey our father.
Therefore, although in Christ I could be bold and order you to do what you ought to do,
When we heat water, we set it aside because we allow the water to cool off.
But when they realized he was a Jew, they all shouted in unison for about two hours: "Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!"
“You will always have the poor among you, but you will not always have me.”
move backwards
And with that he breathed on them and said, "Receive the Holy Spirit.
To move
The spirit that governs the relationship between the sexes
“Greater love has no one than this: to lay down one’s life for one’s friends.”
When bees swarm, they stay just one week [in their hive] and then they leave the hive to transfer.
And Judas went to the chief priests and the officers of the temple guard and discussed with them how he might betray Jesus.
Overshoot
The python is sneaking up on the chicken.
His head was brought in on a platter and given to the girl, who carried it to her mother.
There is no one to whom he shows favoritism; he treats [everyone] equally. There is no one whom he treats as less.
That which is called a valley in English is a flat area which is between two mountains.
papaya
The apostles and elders met to consider this question.
When the hour came, Jesus and his apostles reclined at the table.
And we, who with unveiled faces all reflect the Lord's glory, are being transformed into his likeness with everincreasing glory, which comes from the Lord, who is the Spirit.
And we are sending along with him the brother who is praised by all the churches for his service to the gospel.
We’re going to tell a story about a bachelor.
Return empty-handed
Pat it [on the back??] so it will go to sleep.
When it was almost time for the Jewish Passover, Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
He is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not only for ours but also for the sins of the whole world.
We wrinkle our eyebrows when we have just awakened.
Just
The people who had ridden the jeep that crashed with another vehicle were caught in a disaster they did not foresee.
We let them know superficially.
“Yes it is, Lord,” she said. “Even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their master’s table.”
To be broken as a limb
So he replied to the messengers, “Go back and report to John what you have seen and heard: The blind receive sight, the lame walk, those who have leprosy are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the good news is proclaimed to the poor.
The name of a village on the Kapalong river
Deacons, likewise, are to be men worthy of respect, sincere, not indulging in much wine, and not pursuing dishonest gain.
If we eat something that still has a bone, we bite into chew the flesh off until it is stripped of meat.
The number of the mounted troops was two hundred million. I heard their number.
To take a bit of salt, it is called one pinch.
When Paul reached the steps, the violence of the mob was so great he had to be carried by the soldiers.
I’ll borrow your awl if you have one.
Now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian.
sob
The chicken is bled on the altar.
After six days Jesus took with him Peter, James and John the brother of James, and led them up a high mountain by themselves.
“We are witnesses of everything he did in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem. They killed him by hanging him on a cross,
To be diligent
“All who have come before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep have not listened to them.”
At this they tried to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him, because his time had not yet come.
wild boar
If the pangi fruit has just fallen, it is not ready to take.
A man says, “My wife has become pregnant on me; maybe she will give birth when I am absent.”
A cave in a mountain.
confront
Nevertheless, God's solid foundation stands firm, sealed with this inscription: "The Lord knows those who are his," and, "Everyone who confesses the name of the Lord must turn away from wickedness."
A clock also has phosphorescence.
Again, it says, “Rejoice, you Gentiles, with his people.”
Just then a man in their synagogue who was possessed by an evil spirit cried out,
a white bead
behave oneself.
If our companion does not pay attention to us, he is letting us know that we are not closely related to him.
namesake
When we plant something such as seedlings, then we will do the planting carefully.
If two [people] are going downriver [by raft/canoe] and one gets ahead, the other will chase and catch up with the one which got ahead.
They claim to know God, but by their actions they deny him. They are detestable, disobedient and unfit for doing anything good.
Whether it is high or short, thick or thin, if it is in the yard and surrounds a house, it is called a fense.
steal.
The next day the crowd that had stayed on the opposite shore of the lake realized that only one boat had been there, and that Jesus had not entered it with his disciples, but that they had gone away alone.
"What do you want me to do for you?" Jesus asked him. The blind man said, "Rabbi, I want to see."
That bread on which you spread a layer of peanut butter, that is the sandwiched peanut butter.
A chicken which has laid eggs, sets [on its eggs] for fifteen days or sixteen days before [they] crack open.
Without father or mother, without genealogy, without beginning of days or end of life, like the Son of God he remains a priest forever.
As it is, we are in danger of being charged with rioting because of today's events. In that case we would not be able to account for this commotion, since there is no reason for it."
The very fact that you have lawsuits among you means you have been completely defeated already. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be cheated?
We act irresponsible because we’ve been charmed.
To arise
But he wanted to justify himself, so he asked Jesus, “And who is my neighbor?”
When they arrived, they went upstairs to the room where they were staying. Those present were Peter, John, James and Andrew; Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew; James son of Alphaeus and Simon the Zealot, and Judas son of James.
They went to a place called Gethsemane, and Jesus said to his disciples, "Sit here while I pray."
scarcely
I'm going to choose a house to live in.
What relation to Lugtom is Sanglit?
The piglets take turns moving around
and, “In the very place where it was said to them, ‘You are not my people,’ there they will be called ‘children of the living God.’”
But someone may ask, "How are the dead raised? With what kind of body will they come?"
Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest.
rebuild a house on the same site
If a child becomes lame, one foot will draw up.
But the beast was captured, and with it the false prophet who had performed the signs on its behalf. With these signs he had deluded those who had received the mark of the beast and worshiped its image. The two of them were thrown alive into the fiery lake of burning sulfur.
and many false prophets will appear and deceive many people.
His speech persuaded them. They called the apostles in and had them flogged. Then they ordered them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go.
To get wet.
If the foot should say, "Because I am not a hand, I do not belong to the body," it would not for that reason cease to be part of the body.
go ahead and do something
About nine in the morning he went out and saw others standing in the marketplace doing nothing.
who has saved us and called us to a holy life--not because of anything we have done but because of his own purpose and grace. This grace was given us in Christ Jesus before the beginning of time,
hair or feathers standing on end
younger-older relationship
To be thrown at
Peeling, as the outermost layer of a kernel of corn, a bean, skin of a pig, or from flesh that was blistered
Look, your house is left to you desolate. I tell you, you will not see me again until you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.' "
if we endure, we will also reign with him. If we disown him, he will also disown us;
" 'Lord,' I replied, 'these men know that I went from one synagogue to another to imprison and beat those who believe in you.
But they urged him strongly, "Stay with us, for it is nearly evening; the day is almost over." So he went in to stay with them.
A very large spear.
“When the kings of the earth who committed adultery with her and shared her luxury see the smoke of her burning, they will weep and mourn over her.
push aside
The talabubung, they are companions of the evil spirits. Those are the ones who are owners who live in the mountains, baliti trees, cliffs and waterfalls.
Turn up
To move about (as unborn piglets)
things, belongings
Those who escorted Paul brought him to Athens and then left with instructions for Silas and Timothy to join him as soon as possible.
And again, when God brings his firstborn into the world, he says, “Let all God’s angels worship him.”
And if what was transitory came with glory, how much greater is the glory of that which lasts!
shy
Small flute
Now it was the custom at the Feast to release a prisoner whom the people requested.
lift off, as a rock
And now you will be silent and not able to speak until the day this happens, because you did not believe my words, which will come true at their appointed time.”
One’s female ward
As for the lawa-an tree, when there is a lump of sap on the lawa-an tree, when it is hardened, that is the resin which can be made into a light.
beg insistently
very tired
So he called in each one of his master’s debtors. He asked the first, ‘How much do you owe my master?’
for I have five brothers. Let him warn them, so that they will not also come to this place of torment.’
Don’t loosen your arms; hold them out tight.
As it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet: “A voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for him.
They are only a matter of food and drink and various ceremonial washings-- external regulations applying until the time of the new order.
tree uprooted by landslide, flood, or wind
to try
Over there (within sight)
So then really she is also my daughter-in-law
I know your deeds. See, I have placed before you an open door that no one can shut. I know that you have little strength, yet you have kept my word and have not denied my name.
Two people are arm wrestling to see which of them is the strongest.
At this the high priest Ananias ordered those standing near Paul to strike him on the mouth.
To the Jews I became like a Jew, to win the Jews. To those under the law I became like one under the law (though I myself am not under the law), so as to win those under the law.
Kind of pattern of a carved comb made of bamboo.
if I am delayed, you will know how people ought to conduct themselves in God’s household, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and foundation of the truth.
Excessive
We sent Timothy, who is our brother and co-worker in God’s service in spreading the gospel of Christ, to strengthen and encourage you in your faith,
remove clothing; go naked
A few days later, when Jesus again entered Capernaum, the people heard that he had come home.
If someone is bitten by a snake, there is also a little known remedy which is used as a treatment for the snake bite. It is called little known because only a few people know about that medicine.
strengthening the disciples and encouraging them to remain true to the faith. “We must go through many hardships to enter the kingdom of God,” they said.
steal land from someone.
" 'My son,' the father said, 'you are always with me, and everything I have is yours.
break
I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish; no one can snatch them out of my hand.
who have been chosen according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through the sanctifying work of the Spirit, to be obedient to Jesus Christ and sprinkled with his blood: Grace and peace be yours in abundance.
locust.
When evening came, the boat was in the middle of the lake, and he was alone on land.
By faith Enoch was taken from this life, so that he did not experience death: “He could not be found, because God had taken him away.” For before he was taken, he was commended as one who pleased God.
slice or strip mat material.
sew with long running stitches
but I know him because I am from him and he sent me."
“You know the way to the place where I am going.”
And they began to accuse him, saying, "We have found this man subverting our nation. He opposes payment of taxes to Caesar and claims to be Christ, a king."
When he had said this, he showed them his hands and feet.
Uncle was thirsty (lit. dry) after walking far. He said, “I would like to drink [something] please if maybe you have some water, Usì.”
But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law were furious and began to discuss with one another what they might do to Jesus.
For this son of mine was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.' So they began to celebrate.
We had just barely sat down when guests arrived and caught us as we were eating.
mirror
Wrestle each other playfully
When we motivate a child to sweep, we hand him a broom so that he will learn.
Disease which makes dogs crazy (rabies)
jump
At that time the disciples came to Jesus and asked, “Who, then, is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?”
They want to be teachers of the law, but they do not know what they are talking about or what they so confidently affirm.
We catch the first glimpse of the moon.
We’ll separate out the broken chips.
‘He will wipe every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death’ or mourning or crying or pain, for the old order of things has passed away.”
Peter asked her, “Tell me, is this the price you and Ananias got for the land?” “Yes,” she said, “that is the price.”
come out of a hole; be born; burst forth
The armies of heaven were following him, riding on white horses and dressed in fine linen, white and clean.
A type of tree
Stiff,
For if there had been nothing wrong with that first covenant, no place would have been sought for another.
Embankment
On the contrary, we speak as those approved by God to be entrusted with the gospel. We are not trying to please people but God, who tests our hearts.
crunchy sound when eating something crisp
for a noose to tighten on the neck of a bird or other animal
This cloth is my cherished possession.
If you purpose to make a purchase transaction, you will inquire and if [the other person] will give it, you will buy it.
And again in the passage above he says, “They shall never enter my rest.”
To have formed a scar.
pounce
Wild
They weren't able to tell me another word [for the word aguanta “endure”.]
Camotes are used for bait
Bladder
to cause disaster
Then he said to his disciples, “The time is coming when you will long to see one of the days of the Son of Man, but you will not see it.
“He saved others,” they said, “but he can’t save himself! He’s the king of Israel! Let him come down
to do something by hand
And you see and hear how this fellow Paul has convinced and led astray large numbers of people here in Ephesus and in practically the whole province of Asia. He says that man-made gods are no gods at all.
When they landed, they saw a fire of burning coals there with fish on it, and some bread.
explaining and proving that the Messiah had to suffer and rise from the dead. “This Jesus I am proclaiming to you is the Messiah,” he said.
predict
Vulgar
When they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Jewish synagogue.
Show me the coin used for paying the tax.” They brought him a denarius,
Kind of red rice; a mat woven of small and narrow strips
If you believed Moses, you would believe me, for he wrote about me.
But to each one of us grace has been given as Christ apportioned it.
He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation.
take different roads
Jesus gave them this answer: “Very truly I tell you, the Son can do nothing by himself; he can do only what he sees his Father doing, because whatever the Father does the Son also does.
And we also thank God continually because, when you received the word of God, which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men, but as it actually is, the word of God, which is at work in you who believe.
Fingernail
Gorged stomach
John's baptism--was it from heaven, or from men? Tell me!"
I'll get up enough energy [to go check on] my pig trap.
string as beads
Joaquin cannot manage to resolve this problem because it is very difficult.
The sixth angel poured out his bowl on the great river Euphrates, and its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings from the East.
If there are a lot of dirty spider webs, we brush off the webs of the spiders so that they will be removed. When you brush them off, the debris drops to the floor.
Consequently, whoever rebels against the authority is rebelling against what God has instituted, and those who do so will bring judgment on themselves.
He went to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and on the Sabbath day he went into the synagogue, as was his custom. He stood up to read,
Sugarcane, that is what is made into sugar and is sweet when added to the coffee that we drink
"Be careful," Jesus warned them. "Watch out for the yeast of the Pharisees and that of Herod."
so then really
The roasted kernels of corn is fed to the mother who has newly given birth so that the blood clots will be discharged from her body.
He is not here; he has risen! Remember how he told you, while he was still with you in Galilee:
climb around on branches or logs
and the enemy who sows them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the harvesters are angels.
On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread, when it was customary to sacrifice the Passover lamb, Jesus' disciples asked him, "Where do you want us to go and make preparations for you to eat the Passover?"
flock of birds.
One breaks/cuts off leaves when food will be served up on them.
As for the frog eggs, they have not yet hatched. And there close by will be the mother.
To become dry, as plants or clothing
four things
Jackfruit
The disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus said again, "Children, how hard it is to enter the kingdom of God!
So we say with confidence, "The Lord is my helper; I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?"
As soon as Jesus was baptized, he went up out of the water. At that moment heaven was opened, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and alighting on him.
But when the set time had fully come, God sent his Son, born of a woman, born under the law,  to redeem those under the law, that we might receive adoption to sonship.
Time
Those who heard this asked, “Who then can be saved?”
The dog is barking.
Find out.
Lullaby
Emotionally fragile or unstable; soft-hearted
Let no one on the housetop go down to take anything out of the house.
Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away
give something as a token of appreciation
But thanks be to God that, though you used to be slaves to sin, you have come to obey from your heart the pattern of teaching that has now claimed your allegiance.
Then Agrippa said to Paul, “You have permission to speak for yourself.” So Paul motioned with his hand and began his defense:
strain
A few men became followers of Paul and believed. Among them was Dionysius, a member of the Areopagus, also a woman named Damaris, and a number of others.
well-built
eggbeater
The men cut the field, working side by side.
I always thank my God as I remember you in my prayers,
For my flesh is real food and my blood is real drink.
Therefore many of the Jews who had come to visit Mary, and had seen what Jesus did, put their faith in him.
To one there is given through the Spirit the message of wisdom, to another the message of knowledge by means of the same Spirit,
But the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have Pilate release Barabbas instead.
And throw that worthless servant outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
stop bleeding
Your wealth has rotted, and moths have eaten your clothes.
A woven, patterned necklace with strands of beads
The disciples said, "See, Lord, here are two swords." "That is enough," he replied.
become sooty
Push the raft
“How many loaves do you have?” Jesus asked. “Seven,” they replied, “and a few small fish.”
embrace as a sign of affection or reconciliation
stunned
Grip tightly
swoop down and snatch
How foolish! What you sow does not come to life unless it dies.
to be carried by two people
Patterned, mottled, color; variation in pattern and/or in color.
to signify or use something as a guarantee
He replied: "Watch out that you are not deceived. For many will come in my name, claiming, 'I am he,' and, 'The time is near.' Do not follow them.
Yes, and I will continue to rejoice, for I know that through your prayers and the help given by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, what has happened to me will turn out for my deliverance.
who had not consented to their decision and action. He came from the Judean town of Arimathea and he was waiting for the kingdom of God.
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by me and Silas and Timothy, was not "Yes" and "No," but in him it has always been "Yes."
A rattan woven basket
With this in mind, since I myself have carefully investigated everything from the beginning, I too decided to write an orderly account for you, most excellent Theophilus,  so that you may know the certainty of the things you have been taught.
Paul and his companions traveled throughout the region of Phrygia and Galatia, having been kept by the Holy Spirit from preaching the word in the province of Asia.
You lost your balance (??) If you hadnt happened to sit down you would have ended up on the floor.; You lost your balance.
At that time Jesus said, “I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children.
Adjacent house
But Jesus came and touched them. “Get up,” he said. “Don’t be afraid.”
He gave them permission, and the evil spirits came out and went into the pigs. The herd, about two thousand in number, rushed down the steep bank into the lake and were drowned.
This is the confidence we have in approaching God: that if we ask anything according to his will, he hears us.
Each day Jesus was teaching at the temple, and each evening he went out to spend the night on the hill called the Mount of Olives,
Then Jesus told him, "Because you have seen me, you have believed; blessed are those who have not seen and yet have believed."
Sharpening stone, whetstone
Make a fire
Moon
Abaca
"Crucify him!" they shouted.
suddenly
A container made of bark or bamboo used for carrying unshelled rice.
For though we live in the world, we do not wage war as the world does.
I press on toward the goal to win the prize for which God has called me heavenward in Christ Jesus.
He caused [me] to be short changed taking my domesticated animals and then not returning them to me
It still remains that some will enter that rest, and those who formerly had the gospel preached to them did not go in, because of their disobedience.
When the leftover section [is harvested] there will be just one basketful left .
When Christ came as high priest of the good things that are already here, he went through the greater and more perfect tabernacle that is not man-made, that is to say, not a part of this creation.
You call your father “Amò”.
I vouch for him that he is working hard for you and for those at Laodicea and Hierapolis.
So you testify against yourselves that you are the descendants of those who murdered the prophets.
She will give birth to a son, and you are to give him the name Jesus, because he will save his people from their sins.”
They said to her, “There is no one among your relatives who has that name.”
But the Jews who refused to believe stirred up the other Gentiles and poisoned their minds against the brothers.
Remember this: Whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows generously will also reap generously.
When the teachers of the law who were Pharisees saw him eating with the "sinners" and tax collectors, they asked his disciples: "Why does he eat with tax collectors and 'sinners'?"
active (as in a child or monkey always moving)
lie
He came to Simon Peter, who said to him, “Lord, are you going to wash my feet?”
The feathery chicken discarded her young when she was about to lay again.
Thus, by their fruit you will recognize them.
But whoever hates his brother is in the darkness and walks around in the darkness; he does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded him.
But everything should be done in a fitting and orderly way.
center section of a field left unharvested
We [sleep in] opposite directions.
Personal case-marking particle oblique (recipient or beneficiary)
Jesus called them together and said, "You know that those who are regarded as rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their high officials exercise authority over them.
Doorway
and said to them, "You brought me this man as one who was inciting the people to rebellion. I have examined him in your presence and have found no basis for your charges against him.
For this reason I am sending to you Timothy, my son whom I love, who is faithful in the Lord. He will remind you of my way of life in Christ Jesus, which agrees with what I teach everywhere in every church.
We put no stumbling block in anyone’s path, so that our ministry will not be discredited.
This proposal pleased the whole group. They chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit; also Philip, Procorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolas from Antioch, a convert to Judaism.
"How many loaves do you have?" he asked. "Go and see." When they found out, they said, "Five--and two fish."
privately
Peter asked, "Lord, are you telling this parable to us, or to everyone?"
cover
These returned and reported it to the rest; but they did not believe them either.
As for the person who makes an issue about something, someone else will have to speak in order to make a settlement.
Cut vines
"Am I a Jew?" Pilate replied. "It was your people and your chief priests who handed you over to me. What is it you have done?"
Don’t clink the glasses together.
Buntit is keeping vigil over Likanay’s body.
He will trade a pig for that one.
Just then his disciples returned and were surprised to find him talking with a woman. But no one asked, “What do you want?” or “Why are you talking with her?”
under
for something to inadvertently cause termination, as a pregnancy
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Spirit which claims ownership of mountains, baliti trees, cliffs and waterfalls; familiar spirits
starchy tuber with heart-shaped leaves, requires soaking to remove poison
“In Bethlehem in Judea,” they replied, “for this is what the prophet has written:
So he made a whip out of cords, and drove all from the temple courts, both sheep and cattle; he scattered the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.
about
Therefore, the promise comes by faith, so that it may be by grace and may be guaranteed to all Abraham’s offspring—not only to those who are of the law but also to those who have the faith of Abraham. He is the father of us all.
The outside layer of an egg including the membrane, that is the kalungon.
fish.
and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which is through faith in Christ--the righteousness that comes from God and is by faith.
He is the one who comes after me, the straps of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie.”
To curse someone
As for that anit taboo, they say it is God's punishment for messing around with creatures because, as for the creatures, they don’t bother people.
But when they came to Jesus and found that he was already dead, they did not break his legs.
Am I now trying to win the approval of human beings, or of God? Or am I trying to please people? If I were still trying to please people, I would not be a servant of Christ.
To strengthen
finger-like appendage of a crab or shrimp
a carried lunch
protect
To write
I’ll drink from the water pole since there isn’t any dipper.
Happy
A portion of my land was taken away [from me]. [He] chose a time that coincided with my absence.
Very dry and crackling
Therefore, rid yourselves of all malice and all deceit, hypocrisy, envy, and slander of every kind.
When the bodies of the grubs wiggle, they likewise squirm
"He who is not with me is against me, and he who does not gather with me, scatters.
But if the unbeliever leaves, let it be so. The brother or the sister is not bound in such circumstances; God has called us to live in peace.
To chatter
And if Christ has not been raised, our preaching is useless and so is your faith.
A man called Barabbas was in prison with the insurrectionists who had committed murder in the uprising.
A person who visited another place, didn’t stay very long then he returned home. If he stayed three days then he returned.
We will haul it downriver.
to give
hold someone in an embrace to restrain them
Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power.
That which is planted, like corn, rice, monggo beans, and ulibon grain, those are what are planted because we drop [the seeds] as they are planted.
Neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything; what counts is a new creation.
Mother's cut camote stems are gathered together which she will use to plant sweet potatoes tomorrow.
“Sovereign Lord, as you have promised, you may now dismiss your servant in peace.
"Why don't you judge for yourselves what is right?
stunted, dwarfed
Don’t sit on the sack of corn because it will spill out.
But he answered his father, 'Look! All these years I've been slaving for you and never disobeyed your orders. Yet you never gave me even a young goat so I could celebrate with my friends.
Contents
That is why it is called the Field of Blood to this day.
Engagement feast
What Jesus did here in Cana of Galilee was the first of the signs through which he revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him.
Get out every last weed lest it go to weed. If the rest of the weeds aren’t pulled up, they’ll grow up tall.
“Truly I tell you, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the kingdom of God.”
Many of them said, “He is demon-possessed and raving mad. Why listen to him?”
someone with supernatural knowledge, a seer
To be angry, fed up
to remove clothes; to lose one’s clothing
There will be no more night. They will not need the light of a lamp or the light of the sun, for the Lord God will give them light. And they will reign for ever and ever.
Exert effort to pull back the saw so that you will learn how to saw.
And you, Capernaum, will you be lifted to the heavens? No, you will go down to Hades. For if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in Sodom, it would have remained to this day.
I have made you known to them, and will continue to make you known in order that the love you have for me may be in them and that I myself may be in them."
short eel
and that he may send the Messiah, who has been appointed for you—even Jesus.
have a cold
On reaching Jerusalem, Jesus entered the temple area and began driving out those who were buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves,
honor your father and mother,’ and ‘love your neighbor as yourself.’”
A layer of something, such as an additional layer of clothing.
I myself did not know him, but the reason I came baptizing with water was that he might be revealed to Israel.”
Let us behave decently, as in the daytime, not in orgies and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and debauchery, not in dissension and jealousy.
The smoking torch, that is what is used to make smoke to drive out the bees.
The armed band(s) in the past were bad because they killed [people] who had no fault. But the bands of armed warrior(s) today have become groups of good warriors because they now help the soldiers.
have hiccoughs
to vent, as anger in such a way that people are taken by surprise
Then he told this parable: "A man had a fig tree, planted in his vineyard, and he went to look for fruit on it, but did not find any.
We’ll go by ourselves.
to be curved, as a road
sharpened stake which is used as a lever
A kind of fish.
drawn-up limb, as in a crippled leg or hand
and the boat was already a considerable distance from land, buffeted by the waves because the wind was against it.
Ask for something; request; beg
I have been crucified with Christ and I no longer live, but Christ lives in me. The life I live in the body, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.
chew noisily, chomp
Don't you know that you yourselves are God's temple and that God's Spirit lives in you?
set out a fish trap
“We found the jail securely locked, with the guards standing at the doors; but when we opened them, we found no one inside.”
As for the bank, it was dug out at the bottom and was collapsed and washed away
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
grieve
pebbly or bumpy surface
by surprise
Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the high priest’s servant, cutting off his right ear. (The servant’s name was Malchus.)
Jesus replied, “The one who has dipped his hand into the bowl with me will betray me.
We are stringing beads.
When they asked him to spend more time with them, he declined.
But God turned away from them and gave them over to the worship of the sun, moon and stars. This agrees with what is written in the book of the prophets: ‘Did you bring me sacrifices and offerings forty years in the wilderness, people of Israel?
To reserve or have "dibs" on something so someone else will not get it first.
It contained all kinds of four-footed animals, as well as reptiles and birds.
The high priest tore his clothes. "Why do we need any more witnesses?" he asked.
Jesus replied, "The people of this age marry and are given in marriage.
For Moses said, ‘The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your own people; you must listen to everything he tells you.
To scold
Then I went to Syria and Cilicia.
Word used to shoo chickens.
This title was written on her forehead:
Then they spit in his face and struck him with their fists. Others slapped him
When his accusers got up to speak, they did not charge him with any of the crimes I had expected.
gather together
The rain delayed us.
The storm clouds can be shouted away if there is a shaman.
As for the person who easily becomes frustrated, his thoughts are short and he quickly becomes agitated and angry.
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant looking for fine pearls.
An argument developed between some of John’s disciples and a certain Jew over the matter of ceremonial washing.
The next day we set sail from there and arrived off Kios. The day after that we crossed over to Samos, and on the following day arrived at Miletus.
If our cooking of viand is good, it is delicious because it is tasty because the meat/fish is tasty.
halfway point
The [word] amonggoy, that is also used to call/address a father. It is a name used to praise [one’s father].
fuss, whine (as a child)
But their minds were made dull, for to this day the same veil remains when the old covenant is read. It has not been removed, because only in Christ is it taken away.
The hip, especially of the fleshy part but not the joint.
The Imbabasuk spirit is the one who gives a big harvest. That is the one who does magic.
The widow said, “I’m after  the house that Jeremy made but I don't yet have anything to use for payment.”
Have you suffered so much for nothing- -if it really was for nothing?
Navel
Where were you born?
To what can I compare this generation? They are like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling out to others:
Quick-burning
Seed wart
A person who makes a recipe from the taro plant, grates coconut with which he makes coconut milk
Piglet.
branch
prepare
The arm muscles are stiff.
Pus
[The expression] doesn't mean that one's love is lacking, it refers to [the fact that] a someone feels very sad
angry
The disciples were even more amazed, and said to each other, "Who then can be saved?"
As they were going out, they met a man from Cyrene, named Simon, and they forced him to carry the cross.
take a long time.
Path.
In bringing many sons and daughters to glory, it was fitting that God, for whom and through whom everything exists, should make the pioneer of their salvation perfect through what he suffered.
skin of pangi fruit
red tree fruit
east
When we make a [shallow] well, we put sand in it so that the debris will be filtered out.
Dagger
We are chased by a pig which is protecting its offspring.
The sesame [stems] are turned upside down to let the seeds drop out because the seeds have burst open.
“But so that we may not cause offense, go to the lake and throw out your line. Take the first fish you catch; open its mouth and you will find a four-drachma coin. Take it and give it to them for my tax and yours.”
And if you have not been trustworthy with someone else’s property, who will give you property of your own?
My dear children, I write this to you so that you will not sin. But if anybody does sin, we have one who speaks to the Father in our defense--Jesus Christ, the Righteous One.
Three days after arriving in the province, Festus went up from Caesarea to Jerusalem,
Large white camote with first texture.
"Here is a boy with five small barley loaves and two small fish, but how far will they go among so many?"
“If you belonged to the world, it would love you as its own. As it is, you do not belong to the world, but I have chosen you out of the world. That is why the world hates you.”
If I must boast, I will boast of the things that show my weakness.
Look at my hands and my feet. It is I myself! Touch me and see; a ghost does not have flesh and bones, as you see I have."
because they could not bear what was commanded: "If even an animal touches the mountain, it must be stoned."
dig up
to clap
They worship me in vain; their teachings are merely human rules.’”
roll eyes, cross-eyed
for adulterers and perverts, for slave traders and liars and perjurers--and for whatever else is contrary to the sound doctrine
You want something but don't get it. You kill and covet, but you cannot have what you want. You quarrel and fight. You do not have, because you do not ask God.
heed a warning
Therefore, I will punish him and then release him."
The child repeatedly topples as it takes steps as it approaches its mother.
When the Lamb opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say, “Come!”
Listen to another parable: There was a landowner who planted a vineyard. He put a wall around it, dug a winepress in it and built a watchtower. Then he rented the vineyard to some farmers and went away on a journey.
You complete the house.
We harvest young corn because we will boil it since it is good to eat.
Haven't you read this scripture: " 'The stone the builders rejected has become the capstone ;
Her parents were astonished, but he ordered them not to tell anyone what had happened.
if this is so, then the Lord knows how to rescue godly men from trials and to hold the unrighteous for the day of judgment, while continuing their punishment.
To insult by pulling eyelids down
At this, they picked up stones to stone him, but Jesus hid himself, slipping away from the temple grounds.
"a voice of one calling in the desert, 'Prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for him.' "
But when the Pharisees heard this, they said, “It is only by Beelzebul, the prince of demons, that this fellow drives out demons.”
While Jesus was still speaking, some men came from the house of Jairus, the synagogue ruler. "Your daughter is dead," they said. "Why bother the teacher any more?"
He did not discriminate between us and them, for he purified their hearts by faith.
A person who was strong with little time elapse, he was able to finish his field.
Wherever the tether of the dog ends, that is where he will be limited.
Jesus replied, "To be sure, Elijah does come first, and restores all things. Why then is it written that the Son of Man must suffer much and be rejected?
When we cut down bamboo, we sharpen it because we will make into a bamboo spear.
Wide-spread, far apart
A person who makes a field for his yearly crop of rice but doesn't live to harvest his rice because he has died, he has died before reaching his harvest and so did not get to eat his rice.
Submit to one another out of reverence for Christ.
The water [dried up??] and went underground??.
“Go,” he told him, “wash in the Pool of Siloam” (this word means “Sent”). So the man went and washed, and came home seeing.
fly (insect)
Carrying his own cross, he went out to the place of the Skull (which in Aramaic is called Golgotha).
He trusts in God. Let God rescue him now if he wants him, for he said, ‘I am the Son of God.’”
When Jesus came down from the mountainside, large crowds followed him.
[Someone else] whom we should likewise be mindful to give to are the widows who have nothing [for their family] to eat because  there is a famine now.
Their fingernails were sweating.
antidote
The fire is smoky
Whenever you are arrested and brought to trial, do not worry beforehand about what to say. Just say whatever is given you at the time, for it is not you speaking, but the Holy Spirit.
The circumcised believers who had come with Peter were astonished that the gift of the Holy Spirit had been poured out even on Gentiles.
Suffering.
None,
Watch out that you do not lose what you have worked for, but that you may be rewarded fully.
His brother-in-law keeps a store.
Then he took the seven loaves and the fish, and when he had given thanks, he broke them and gave them to the disciples, and they in turn to the people.
or
Lift up one’s head
For I know that good itself does not dwell in me, that is, in my sinful nature. For I have the desire to do what is good, but I cannot carry it out.
That family is at peace; there is nothing to worry them.
You will hear of wars and rumors of wars, but see to it that you are not alarmed. Such things must happen, but the end is still to come.
When there is someone to take care of a child, the mother can get away by herself.
I do not permit a woman to teach or to assume authority over a man; she must be quiet.
Examine yourselves to see whether you are in the faith; test yourselves. Do you not realize that Christ Jesus is in you—unless, of course, you fail the test?
Wood chips.
floating ribs
time, room, or space for something; opportunity
go the long way around, such as to follow a river around its bends
No, but the sacrifices of pagans are offered to demons, not to God, and I do not want you to be participants with demons.
We will build a fire in the middle of the corn field and then we will put those red pepper fruits into the fire.
just as the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”
As for a nursing mother, she abstains from eating foods served at someone else's house in case it might cause the child to die.
to avail oneself of an opportunity to eat
quiver, as a chicken before laying an egg
For there is no difference between Jew and Gentile—the same Lord is Lord of all and richly blesses all who call on him,
Palm of hand
not care about
The chief priests and the teachers of the law heard this and began looking for a way to kill him, for they feared him, because the whole crowd was amazed at his teaching.
dropped
"Therefore since we are God's offspring, we should not think that the divine being is like gold or silver or stone--an image made by man's design and skill.
When he opened the Abyss, smoke rose from it like the smoke from a gigantic furnace. The sun and sky were darkened by the smoke from the Abyss.
Everyone must submit himself to the governing authorities, for there is no authority except that which God has established. The authorities that exist have been established by God.
thread
Philip went to tell Andrew; Andrew and Philip in turn told Jesus.
Before certain men came from James, he used to eat with the Gentiles. But when they arrived, he began to draw back and separate himself from the Gentiles because he was afraid of those who belonged to the circumcision group.
The person who intercepts an enemy watches the path where their leader will pass.
and the people all tried to touch him, because power was coming from him and healing them all.
The reason I left you in Crete was that you might put in order what was left unfinished and appoint elders in every town, as I directed you.
Now to him who is able to establish you by my gospel and the proclamation of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery hidden for long ages past,
To be slow to return.
large roots of huge forest trees growing above ground
You are those who have stood by me in my trials.
Meanwhile, the people were waiting for Zechariah and wondering why he stayed so long in the temple.
The fare of transportation has increased.
And you, my child, will be called a prophet of the Most High; for you will go on before the Lord to prepare the way for him,
Tree with winged seeds
Jumbled or disarranged, as of material or clothing
and many people came to him. They said, "Though John never performed a miraculous sign, all that John said about this man was true."
At once Jesus realized that power had gone out from him. He turned around in the crowd and asked, "Who touched my clothes?"
Jesus is ‘the stone you builders rejected, which has become the cornerstone.’  Salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to mankind by which we must be saved.”
We found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, went on board and set sail.
I have no greater joy than to hear that my children are walking in the truth.
If anyone destroys God's temple, God will destroy him; for God's temple is sacred, and you are that temple.
To the weak I became weak, to win the weak. I have become all things to all people so that by all possible means I might save some.
to fall off something
Move over because I am getting squashed.
I am thankful that I did not baptize any of you except Crispus and Gaius,
As they traveled from town to town, they delivered the decisions reached by the apostles and elders in Jerusalem for the people to obey.
No, a man is a Jew if he is one inwardly; and circumcision is circumcision of the heart, by the Spirit, not by the written code. Such a man's praise is not from men, but from God.
The apostles were brought in and made to appear before the Sanhedrin to be questioned by the high priest.
They spoke about his departure, which he was about to bring to fulfillment at Jerusalem.
take a day off from regular activities
When he gave the letter [to me], he instructed ) [me] to add to it by word of mouth to insure that [the person] would set aside some corn [for him].
It is certainly not a lie because you have shown it to me
seed set aside for planting
enfold,
Then the woman, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell at his feet and, trembling with fear, told him the whole truth.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.
The ties, those are the reinforcing ties.
And you, Capernaum, will you be lifted to the heavens? No, you will go down to Hades.
Impette’s gnawing on a bone.
the stars will fall from the sky, and the heavenly bodies will be shaken.'
A kind of sugarcane (obsolete)
They cooked here under the house
to disembark, to land
Husbands, love your wives, just as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her
woodpecker
where your ancestors tested and tried me, though for forty years they saw what I did.
If I fuel a fire with wood and the fire is hot/strong, it has ignited and has formed hot coals.
slash
The king was enraged. He sent his army and destroyed those murderers and burned their city.
The only thing that is left
When two years had passed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus, but because Felix wanted to grant a favor to the Jews, he left Paul in prison.
fear or panic attributed to an evil spirit
On a Sabbath Jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues,
Fill up the basket with rice.
I'm going to pick a house that is wider if it has no people living in it.
As for the Liboganon river, the cane is thick there in the flad area and its body is hard.
Now Stephen, a man full of God’s grace and power, performed great wonders and signs among the people.
type of bush with wide leaves
"Take away the stone," he said. "But, Lord," said Martha, the sister of the dead man, "by this time there is a bad odor, for he has been there four days."
When they heard that Jesus was alive and that she had seen him, they did not believe it.
Love must be sincere. Hate what is evil; cling to what is good.
Brilliant red bird (same as binti)
Each of you should look not only to your own interests, but also to the interests of others.
That leaf is pounded and then the water is squeezed out.
When Joseph woke up, he did what the angel of the Lord had commanded him and took Mary home as his wife.
outside, as of a house or yard
the skin or outer layer of a fruit, vegetable, or plant
rooster
Wrinkle in skin
Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, the new creation has come: The old has gone, the new is here!
The length between joints of plants such as bamboo, cane or rattan.
escape
Still other seed fell on good soil, where it produced a crop—a hundred, sixty or thirty times what was sown.
So if you consider me a partner, welcome him as you would welcome me.
smoky
As he was going into a village, ten men who had leprosy met him. They stood at a distance
The Lord told him, “Go to the house of Judas on Straight Street and ask for a man from Tarsus named Saul, for he is praying.
To extinguish
Once more Jesus said to them, "I am going away, and you will look for me, and you will die in your sin. Where I go, you cannot come."
The only way the word is used is if we have a companion whom [we] invite to go bathing with us and I say, "Just bring the fragrant soap".
Beggar
and to make plain to everyone the administration of this mystery, which for ages past was kept hidden in God, who created all things.
They had as king over them the angel of the Abyss, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek, Apollyon.
To soak in water.
To have a head-on collision
“or ‘Who will descend into the deep?’” (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead).
to open, as someone's hand, a book, a door, a lid, two sides of a clam
A man is not a Jew if he is only one outwardly, nor is circumcision merely outward and physical.
Therefore Jesus said again, “Very truly I tell you, I am the gate for the sheep.”
Apusow shoots
But I tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you,
slash with a bolo
stretch a basket in the making, in order to shape it and make it larger
They said, "Moses permitted a man to write a certificate of divorce and send her away."
to leave, as people who move
For even Christ did not please himself but, as it is written: “The insults of those who insult you have fallen on me.”
We all fell to the ground, and I heard a voice saying to me in Aramaic, 'Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads.'
I took the little scroll from the angel’s hand and ate it. It tasted as sweet as honey in my mouth, but when I had eaten it, my stomach turned sour.
We test a person to see if his conduct is good.Patogkaran nu.
Command those who are rich in this present world not to be arrogant nor to put their hope in wealth, which is so uncertain, but to put their hope in God, who richly provides us with everything for our enjoyment.
flame
Hoard
The soldiers therefore came and broke the legs of the first man who had been crucified with Jesus, and then those of the other.
My relatives who were flooded in the middle of the night, they were always repeatedly calling, “You-pl, help us because we are going to drown.”
To one he gave five bags of gold, to another two bags, and to another one bag, each according to his ability. Then he went on his journey.
arouse envy
The fishing basket is that in which the catch of fish, etc, is placed.
be run over by a vehicle
week
Knee
point towards
I know that after I leave, savage wolves will come in among you and will not spare the flock.
For my part, even though I am not physically present, I am with you in spirit. As one who is present with you in this way, I have already passed judgment in the name of our Lord Jesus on the one who has been doing this.
The how that has caught fire, it's necessary
saying, "I will surely bless you and give you many descendants."
To be healthy or strong
Igì’s middle finger was inadvertently cut off
Perhaps the people were saying, “So then when John grows up, he/they ?? won’t move when John speaks.”
When everything had been arranged like this, the priests entered regularly into the outer room to carry on their ministry.
There were people who knew me who stopped over at my house and asked for [something] to drink.
dig with claws or hands
faint
What do you think? If a man owns a hundred sheep and one of them wanders away, will he not leave the ninety-nine on the hills and go to look for the one that wandered off?
Very truly I tell you, we speak of what we know, and we testify to what we have seen, but still you people do not accept our testimony.
Even if they sin against you seven times in a day and seven times come back to you saying ‘I repent,’ you must forgive them.”
Arrowhead.
Let us not become conceited, provoking and envying each other.
I saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of the saints, the blood of those who bore testimony to Jesus.
stare
Philip, however, appeared at Azotus and traveled about, preaching the gospel in all the towns until he reached Caesarea.
The centurion replied, “Lord, I do not deserve to have you come under my roof. But just say the word, and my servant will be healed.
So go to the street corners and invite to the banquet anyone you find.’
if the tongue is clamped down on, it can be severed.
rattan
Therefore it is necessary to choose one of the men who have been with us the whole time the Lord Jesus was living among us,  beginning from John’s baptism to the time when Jesus was taken up from us. For one of these must become a witness with us of his resurrection.”
Chicken’s tailbone.
give each other a friendship name
go ahead of
To interrupt
The curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom.
Though they found no proper ground for a death sentence, they asked Pilate to have him executed.
They will dash you to the ground, you and the children within your walls. They will not leave one stone on another, because you did not recognize the time of God's coming to you."
And in him you too are being built together to become a dwelling in which God lives by his Spirit.
But from now on, the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the mighty God."
kind of red rice
gather together
and asked, “What are you willing to give me if I deliver him over to you?” So they counted out for him thirty pieces of silver.
Is the law, therefore, opposed to the promises of God? Absolutely not! For if a law had been given that could impart life, then righteousness would certainly have come by the law.
Igì is venting her frustration because there is no one to watch her children, so she cannot go dig camotes.
To him who loves us and has freed us from our sins by his blood, and has made us to be a kingdom and priests to serve his God and Father--to him be glory and power for ever and ever! Amen.
f we are unable to see our companions for a long time, we become homesick for our home place.
The king was greatly distressed, but because of his oaths and his dinner guests, he did not want to refuse her.
We had a saw which was an instrument for cutting off roofing.
Kind of red rice
treat well, be kind
The jailer told Paul, "The magistrates have ordered that you and Silas be released. Now you can leave. Go in peace."
telling them, “You are to say, ‘His disciples came during the night and stole him away while we were asleep.’
When the ubun-ubun dove calls it says, "bagu-bù, huun, huun, huun."
After sighting Cyprus and passing to the south of it, we sailed on to Syria. We landed at Tyre, where our ship was to unload its cargo.
For the sun rises with scorching heat and withers the plant; its blossom falls and its beauty is destroyed. In the same way, the rich man will fade away even while he goes about his business.
If there is no interpreter, the speaker should keep quiet in the church and speak to himself and God.
they are not to ‘honor their father or mother’ with it. Thus you nullify the word of God for the sake of your tradition.
Then Jesus ordered him, “Don’t tell anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the sacrifices that Moses commanded for your cleansing, as a testimony to them.”
braid
Soon the whole city was in an uproar. The people seized Gaius and Aristarchus, Paul's traveling companions from Macedonia, and rushed as one man into the theater.
One day Jesus said to his disciples, “Let us go over to the other side of the lake.” So they got into a boat and set out.
in preparation for a guest
They all asked, "Are you then the Son of God?" He replied, "You are right in saying I am."
‘After this I will return and rebuild David’s fallen tent. Its ruins I will rebuild, and I will restore it,
high note, brittle sound
Name of a stream and village where a crocodile legend is told.
To flap, as a rooster flaps its wings.
As God's fellow workers we urge you not to receive God's grace in vain.
tornado
And he took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body given for you; do this in remembrance of me."
Every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
shake one’s head
fist fight
A tire becomes smaller if it has a hole because the air will be expelled.
test
He told them this parable: "No one tears a patch from a new garment and sews it on an old one. If he does, he will have torn the new garment, and the patch from the new will not match the old.
wait or delay
Noose.
craving
dirty
When the disciples saw this, they were indignant. “Why this waste?” they asked.
The fruit of the lansones which are thick are clustered together.
When someone has just begun to harvest, other people cannot go there because the harvesters will suffer the negative result of being interrupted and become ill.
Peace to you. The friends here send their greetings. Greet the friends there by name.
“Truly I tell you,” he continued, “no prophet is accepted in his hometown.
Be patient, then, brothers, until the Lord's coming. See how the farmer waits for the land to yield its valuable crop and how patient he is for the autumn and spring rains.
Bathe the child who has become dirty.
When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord suddenly took Philip away, and the eunuch did not see him again, but went on his way rejoicing.
But this has all taken place that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled.” Then all the disciples deserted him and fled.
All who were sitting in the Sanhedrin looked intently at Stephen, and they saw that his face was like the face of an angel.
If we cross to the opposite side of the river, we will be carried away by the current if the water is swift.
slippers
hard, firm (as rock or dry soil)
For the kingdom of God is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit,
So he went to her, took her hand and helped her up. The fever left her and she began to wait on them.
large yellow camote
nail
spider
If that place is abandoned, there will be no more people whom we will  hear talking.
make something wet
And we urge you, brothers and sisters, warn those who are idle and disruptive, encourage the disheartened, help the weak, be patient with everyone.
They all ate the same spiritual food
The person who is taken by surprise that his eyebrow hurts has a sinus-type headache.
He said: "A man of noble birth went to a distant country to have himself appointed king and then to return.
and then he said to his disciples, “Let us go back to Judea.”
Monkey trap
We are relying on Alikas
Therefore let us stop passing judgment on one another. Instead, make up your mind not to put any stumbling block or obstacle in your brother's way.
Peter said to Jesus, "Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. Let us put up three shelters--one for you, one for Moses and one for Elijah."
Then he called two of his centurions and ordered them, "Get ready a detachment of two hundred soldiers, seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen to go to Caesarea at nine tonight.
The Pharisee stood by himself and prayed: ‘God, I thank you that I am not like other people—robbers, evildoers, adulterers—or even like this tax collector.
leech, about an inch long
tamp an eel burrow with pounded fish poison (tuba) wrapped in bamboo
Straighten bangs [by cutting}.
Be at war
Even is that which measures the same; neither is longer
pervasive sound
brown edible fungus that sprouts during rainy months
I'm going to move to another location.
The alag nut is astringent when we chew it.
When we are in a good relationship with our companions, if there is a small problem, it will be quickly resolved.
hen gathering her chicks under her wings
A mother leaves rice behind for gruel to be fed to her child.
The people expected him to swell up or suddenly fall dead, but after waiting a long time and seeing nothing unusual happen to him, they changed their minds and said he was a god.
There was a saw which was borrowed by a person. After he used it, he caused it to be borrowed again by another person.
This is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance.
To be lulled.
Then the mother of Zebedee’s sons came to Jesus with her sons and, kneeling down, asked a favor of him.
“about sin, because people do not believe in me;”
save
He said to them, “Go!” So they came out and went into the pigs, and the whole herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and died in the water.
A red male horse
Kind of white millet
Do not get any gold or silver or copper to take with you in your belts—
nearly
They are spirits of demons performing miraculous signs, and they go out to the kings of the whole world, to gather them for the battle on the great day of God Almighty.
He said to them, "Why are you troubled, and why do doubts rise in your minds?
length
When I fuel [a fire] with wood and the fire becomes hot, it flames.
he predestined us for adoption to sonship through Jesus Christ, in accordance with his pleasure and will—
But those sacrifices are an annual reminder of sins.
bottom and sides of shield which are reinforced with a decorative edge of bronze or aluminium
for they themselves report what kind of reception you gave us. They tell how you turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God,
And he sent messengers on ahead, who went into a Samaritan village to get things ready for him;
No, we speak of God's secret wisdom, a wisdom that has been hidden and that God destined for our glory before time began
Opening or doorway (not an entry into the house); to open the mouth.
Jesus reached out his hand and touched the man. “I am willing,” he said. “Be clean!” Immediately he was cleansed of his leprosy.
offspring of edible bakbak frog
Then Jesus said, "He who has ears to hear, let him hear."
do for a short time
A crosswise slice, we sever by cutting off with a saw-like motion.
We watch [someone] closely because we don't know what his purpose is.
They told Aaron, ‘Make us gods who will go before us. As for this fellow Moses who led us out of Egypt—we don’t know what has happened to him!’
Produce fruit in keeping with repentance. And do not begin to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I tell you that out of these stones God can raise up children for Abraham.
Epaphras, who is one of you and a servant of Christ Jesus, sends greetings. He is always wrestling in prayer for you, that you may stand firm in all the will of God, mature and fully assured.
If we accidently smear soot on ourselves, our bodies and our clothes will become black.
Rotten
When Jesus had finished saying all these things, he said to his disciples,
Cats were changed into manggoose.
But God demonstrates his own love for us in this: While we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
We ought always to thank God for you, brothers and sisters, and rightly so, because your faith is growing more and more, and the love all of you have for one another is increasing.
I will borrow your saw because I will use [it] to cut off[the ends] of wood.
tree
Cock head to one side, as a dog when listening
in despair
The dead man came out, his hands and feet wrapped with strips of linen, and a cloth around his face. Jesus said to them, "Take off the grave clothes and let him go."
I speak the truth in Christ—I am not lying, my conscience confirms it through the Holy Spirit—  I have great sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart.
Ornamented, decorated, dressed up person.
And they took offense at him. But Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his own town and in his own home.”
To be upset.
The forehead has broken out in blisters.
change one’s clothes.
To spear
always eating; not working
small yellow fruit
A kind of red rice.
corn field
"What are you arguing with them about?" he asked.
They cut the meat up and then divided it into shares and then they had the person who carried the pig on his back take the head.
They went to the chief priests and elders and said, "We have taken a solemn oath not to eat anything until we have killed Paul.
travel
slice in pieces
A rat
Blessed is the man who perseveres under trial, because when he has stood the test, he will receive the crown of life that God has promised to those who love him.
Now we are separated .  We won't see each other.
“struts” of house structure.
The sun gives brilliance to the light.
particles of food between one's teeth
Then the men who had been sent returned to the house and found the servant well.
Lance the boil so [the pus] will escape.
If you fail to show up on [that day] of your return, I will expect that what you say is not valid.
Therefore what God has joined together, let man not separate."
When a cigarette is finished burning, its ashes will drop off.
So I will always remind you of these things, even though you know them and are firmly established in the truth you now have.
Shell, of an egg or crab
An ulcer or sore with raised edges
loosen
Just as it was in the days of Noah, so also will it be in the days of the Son of Man.
I eat something to satiate my hunger and so I eat a little so that my hunger will be held off.
Jesus replied, "If anyone loves me, he will obey my teaching. My Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him.
The jabbing pole was fitted together because it was extended.
kind of tender fungus
The end of all things is near. Therefore be alert and of sober mind so that you may pray.
They began to question among themselves which of them it might be who would do this.
to go and look at something or someone, to check on something
Since
so that your giving may be in secret. Then your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.
to pound into powder such as corn or coffee
as so
In the days of Abiathar the high priest, he entered the house of God and ate the consecrated bread, which is lawful only for priests to eat. And he also gave some to his companions."
Then Jesus asked, "What is the kingdom of God like? What shall I compare it to?
If you have nothing for which to scold your companion, our companionship is harmonious. We don’t have any problems [between us].
Grooved (as of fruit)
Heal the sick who are there and tell them, ‘The kingdom of God has come near to you.’
See to it that no one takes you captive through hollow and deceptive philosophy, which depends on human tradition and the elemental spiritual forces of this world rather than on Christ.
Your eye is the lamp of your body. When your eyes are good, your whole body also is full of light. But when they are bad, your body also is full of darkness.
wage war
If we enter into a cavern, there will be light in front of us
Greet Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and his mother, who has been a mother to me, too.
Pilate was surprised to hear that he was already dead. Summoning the centurion, he asked him if Jesus had already died.
In the same way the chief priests and the teachers of the law mocked him among themselves. "He saved others," they said, "but he can't save himself!
pour melted pork fat into a bamboo tube
"Go," said Jesus, "your faith has healed you." Immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus along the road.
having canceled the written code, with its regulations, that was against us and that stood opposed to us; he took it away, nailing it to the cross.
Now there were staying in Jerusalem God-fearing Jews from every nation under heaven.
But when the sun came up, the plants were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
Nothing impure will ever enter it, nor will anyone who does what is shameful or deceitful, but only those whose names are written in the Lamb's book of life.
I didn’t know that one
Whatever we request, we tell our companion whatever it is that we need.
but only a fearful expectation of judgment and of raging fire that will consume the enemies of God.
Judas son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.
Now if the ministry that brought death, which was engraved in letters on stone, came with glory, so that the Israelites could not look steadily at the face of Moses because of its glory, transitory though it was,
which
A person who has a kuglung instrument, took bislig ratan and attached [them] to his kuglung.
stalk of bananas
But in keeping with his promise we are looking forward to a new heaven and a new earth, the home of righteousness.
loose
When you went to visit Lillian, you reached her while she was still at home, you found her at home.
Chew the medicine.
The largest in a litter.
contract an itchy, sore skin disease
So they sat down in groups of hundreds and fifties.
There were three gates on the east, three on the north, three on the south and three on the west.
I have told you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe.
This is how the birth of Jesus the Messiah came about: His mother Mary was pledged to be married to Joseph, but before they came together, she was found to be pregnant through the Holy Spirit.
because those will be days of distress unequaled from the beginning, when God created the world, until now--and never to be equaled again.
don’t
The flood of the Liboganon will come up to us.
This water flooded
If I carry a fox (caught in a snare) through the rice field, daddy will say, “Don’t pass through the field with that fox; the rice will die if a fox passes through it.
grasp hold of
A person who has no love for his companion ostracizes him.
shove
But if their transgression means riches for the world, and their loss means riches for the Gentiles, how much greater riches will their fullness bring!
One who engages in necromancy
For Adam was formed first, then Eve.
At that time the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
"Why are you sleeping?" he asked them. "Get up and pray so that you will not fall into temptation."
Overcast
habitually command (prerogative of igbuyag)
Be very careful, then, how you live—not as unwise but as wise,
He took the blind man by the hand and led him outside the village. When he had spit on the man's eyes and put his hands on him, Jesus asked, "Do you see anything?"
Everyone will pack up and leave because there is something of which they are afraid.
So in Christ Jesus you are all children of God through faith,
To become wrinkled
To love him with all your heart, with all your understanding and with all your strength, and to love your neighbor as yourself is more important than all burnt offerings and sacrifices."
The crowd that followed kept shouting, "Away with him!"
He saw through their duplicity and said to them,
Theirs are the patriarchs, and from them is traced the human ancestry of the Messiah, who is God over all, forever praised! Amen.
Chicken roost
I would indeed like to return to Magimon, but I really won't.
The offspring of the beetles are the alibutod, katod, and langgi-on grubs.
Jesus answered them, "Is it not written in your Law, 'I have said you are gods' ?
We have an altar from which those who minister at the tabernacle have no right to eat.
After the exile to Babylon: Jeconiah was the father of Shealtiel, Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel,
“To the angel of the church in Smyrna write: These are the words of him who is the First and the Last, who died and came to life again.
Be self-controlled and alert. Your enemy the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour.
The monkey stole the key
I tell you, among those born of women there is no one greater than John; yet the one who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.”
If we make a shallow well on the beach, we place sand there so that the debris will be filtered out.
share
Cloud
Peter followed him at a distance, right into the courtyard of the high priest. There he sat with the guards and warmed himself at the fire.
While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them,
Truly I tell you, all this will come on this generation.
ladder with rungs
If the ministry that brought condemnation was glorious, how much more glorious is the ministry that brings righteousness!
When we were still children, we would throw a stone to the other side of the water [to find out] who had the strongest throw.
glazed or white covering of the eyes which diminishes vision
As he was praying, the appearance of his face changed, and his clothes became as bright as a flash of lightning.
Cook rice so that we’ll take some for lunch.
Bachelor.
Do not be misled: "Bad company corrupts good character."
The next day we landed at Sidon; and Julius, in kindness to Paul, allowed him to go to his friends so they might provide for his needs.
Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing. Keeping God’s commands is what counts.
He called them together, along with the workmen in related trades, and said: "Men, you know we receive a good income from this business.
Whether it is a person who has a spouse or an unmarried lady, he lusts after all [of them].
Maybe it's a possible that I could borrow your horse because I will go to Patil because I will buy medicine.
Don't be deceived, my dear brothers.
“All I have is yours, and all you have is mine. And glory has come to me through them.”
because it is consecrated by the word of God and prayer.
household
The guards were so afraid of him that they shook and became like dead men.
reciprocate
bamboo zither (musical instrument)
sleep together (as husband and wife)
To plant rice out of season
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.
start a new field
Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind and with all your strength.'
toy or game
Then what was said through the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled:
Horn (made from cow or carabao horn)
So, if you think you are standing firm, be careful that you don't fall!
If your stay is long, that is the meaning of an resident alien because you have joined in [with those people].
Halfway.
The horns on a carved bamboo comb.
screech, as a baby monkey when frightened
I was using a light to fish for small bullhead fish in the Liboganon River.
to plant tobacco
A toy, pet, or favored thing.
Therefore I endure everything for the sake of the elect, that they too may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.
"The most important one," answered Jesus, "is this: 'Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one.
wounded
Jesus left there and went to his hometown, accompanied by his disciples.
collector
Now I want you to know, brothers, that what has happened to me has really served to advance the gospel.
There remains, then, a Sabbath-rest for the people of God;
Day before yesterday.
When they heard this, they were furious and began shouting: "Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!"
to open one's eyes
To pursue a wounded animal
So he said to the man who took care of the vineyard, 'For three years now I've been coming to look for fruit on this fig tree and haven't found any. Cut it down! Why should it use up the soil?'
If it is soft and flexible, it will not crack.
For the secret power of lawlessness is already at work; but the one who now holds it back will continue to do so till he is taken out of the way.
When the head of a turtle retracts inside its shell, it moves backwards and goes inside its shell.
wean, separate from parents
The people will be silenced
We chipped off the surface of the luyung in order to make it thin.
And when he finds it, he joyfully puts it on his shoulders
Swollen jaws due to bad teeth.
He told them, “The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few. Ask the Lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.
turn or twist something, as a knob or lid
He replied, “My mother and brothers are those who hear God’s word and put it into practice.”
The snake which goes inside a hole, it also pulls back and inside its hole.
intention
“I have sinned,” he said, “for I have betrayed innocent blood.” “What is that to us?” they replied. “That’s your responsibility.”
how shall we escape if we ignore such a great salvation? This salvation, which was first announced by the Lord, was confirmed to us by those who heard him.
lymph nodes, also sublingual glands
"Then the one inside answers, 'Don't bother me. The door is already locked, and my children are with me in bed. I can't get up and give you anything.'
If the Lord had not cut short those days, no one would survive. But for the sake of the elect, whom he has chosen, he has shortened them.
talk
Egg
When Paul placed his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and they spoke in tongues and prophesied.
wallow in mud
Although they claimed to be wise, they became fools
ruin and misery mark their ways,
retract, as wheels of an airplane
I would like you to be free from concern. An unmarried man is concerned about the Lord’s affairs—how he can please the Lord.
For the third time he spoke to them: "Why? What crime has this man committed? I have found in him no grounds for the death penalty. Therefore I will have him punished and then release him."
To throw a hoop.
big
When Paul made his appeal to be held over for the Emperor's decision, I ordered him held until I could send him to Caesar."
He/she is the parent of my child's spouse.
You will be made rich in every way so that you can be generous on every occasion, and through us your generosity will result in thanksgiving to God.
To go the shortest route; short cut
So Judas threw the money into the temple and left. Then he went away and hanged himself.
for on account of him many of the Jews were going over to Jesus and believing in him.
He did not say this because he cared about the poor but because he was a thief; as keeper of the money bag, he used to help himself to what was put into it.
And he told them this parable: "The ground of a certain rich man produced a good crop.
To inadvertently interrupt something or someone
Then seizing him, they led him away and took him into the house of the high priest. Peter followed at a distance.
And do not forget to do good and to share with others, for with such sacrifices God is pleased.
a kind of large fish
Walk, roam, go
put something inside a cage or pen
And God is able to make all grace abound to you, so that in all things at all times, having all that you need, you will abound in every good work.
adhere to
Pour on
pace back and forth in a limited area due to restriction
“Then, Lord,” Simon Peter replied, “not just my feet but my hands and my head as well!”
The God of our ancestors raised Jesus from the dead—whom you killed by hanging him on a cross.
clap one’s hands
For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous and his ears are attentive to their prayer, but the face of the Lord is against those who do evil."
When Jesus saw this, he was indignant. He said to them, "Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these.
In addition to our own encouragement, we were especially delighted to see how happy Titus was, because his spirit has been refreshed by all of you. I had boasted to him about you, and you have not embarrassed me. But just as everything we said to you was true, so our boasting about you to Titus has proved to be true as well.
At that hour of the night the jailer took them and washed their wounds; then immediately he and all his family were baptized.
A sticky resin
Simon Peter answered, “You are the Messiah, the Son of the living God.”
But now that you have been set free from sin and have become slaves of God, the benefit you reap leads to holiness, and the result is eternal life.
To recede
That woman was selfish and did not give her neighbor any rice.
deep wound
cloudy and drizzly weather that promotes mushroom growth
come down from the cross and save yourself!"
hungry for fresh rice
I have given them the glory that you gave me, that they may be one as we are one:
A felled tree; log.
Resist him, standing firm in the faith, because you know that your brothers throughout the world are undergoing the same kind of sufferings.
logging industry
But when the chief priests and the teachers of the law saw the wonderful things he did and the children shouting in the temple courts, “Hosanna to the Son of David,” they were indignant.
To make tentative plans to do something.
in order that in the coming ages he might show the incomparable riches of his grace, expressed in his kindness to us in Christ Jesus.
To be famous or powerful.
One day the evil spirit answered them, “Jesus I know, and Paul I know about, but who are you?”
tree with rough leaves used like sandpaper
Just now
The people were waiting expectantly and were all wondering in their hearts if John might possibly be the Messiah.
to develop algae or moss
Ascend.
striped eel.
tree bark (used for making walls, baskets, or roofing)
As for people long ago, they weren't able to play because they would be quick to demand retribution and then would ask for a large settlement.
I have given her time to repent of her immorality, but she is unwilling.
(Barabbas had been thrown into prison for an insurrection in the city, and for murder.)
I long to see you so that I may impart to you some spiritual gift to make you strong—
destroy
No one would ??? to go ahead...all the people would be included.
“‘What shall I do, Lord?’ I asked.
Jesus turned and said to Peter, “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me; you do not have in mind the concerns of God, but merely human concerns.”
Someone might argue, “If my falsehood enhances God’s truthfulness and so increases his glory, why am I still condemned as a sinner?”
silenced
Jesus called his disciples to him and said, “I have compassion for these people; they have already been with me three days and have nothing to eat. I do not want to send them away hungry, or they may collapse on the way.”
As for a woman who is newly pregnant, if she cannot eat what she is craving for, the pregnancy will be terminated because the baby will come out.
coconut
Then Pilate announced to the chief priests and the crowd, "I find no basis for a charge against this man."
Whoever has stamina to come along, he/she will be chosen.
You will not be able to take the horse unless you have an agreement as to when you will pay for it in full.
Become smaller, wide apart, smashed, dispersed, shrink
We will be able to fil upl [our baskets] when harvesting.
itchy toe
On the verge of fainting; To be discouraged
eye
Mery has to detour when she goes to school because there is no shortcut nearby (lit. no shortcut path here close).
sakup
burut
Di mgo sulod,” kagi ni Pedro, “natagaan kud to ian now impohimatoy ki Hisus su waro kow mataga ko hondoi nigligkat woy songo waro tokora to mgo igbuyag now.
Nò, oghimatayan porom to mgo otow si Pablo, di nanangonan on ka igbuyag to mgo sundalu to nasamuk on ka tibo no taga Hirusalim.
Songo ogtokoron koy no suguanon din su tu-tuu ian ka soini no ignangonnangon noy, woy ogkabuligan koy to kabogbogan to Magboboot. No ka igkamatuwarong no ogligkat to Magboboot, ian ogkounawaan ka kalasag noy woy ka moirob noy ko duon ogkatangko noy.
No duon papitu no otow no anak ni Isiba no songo nig–ol–olog to sikan. Hudiu ka amoy ran no Labow to mgo Talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu.
Songo kono man ogpokog-unawa ka goinawa ni Hisus to goinawa ni Satanas. Woy songo kono ogpokog-unawa ka goinawa to otow no ogtuu woy ka goinawa to otow no waro nigtuu.
Ogko-unawa sikandin to uripon to Magbobo-ot
haud
bu-al
Nò, waro malugoy no pigkita ni Hisus ka sikan no otow dio to Dakol no Ampuanan. Kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandin, “Nò, man, noulian kad on! Kono ka oghutuk ogpakasalo su ko oghutuk ka, ogkoumaan ka buwa to molmohirap pad no masakit nu.”
sokol
Ian su tibo no mgo koot-otawan to soini no kalibutan, nokoinum to sikan no inumanon din no ian ka mgo ig-ayat din oyow ogpokounug sikandan to mgo maroot no batasan din. Ka mgo igbuyag to soini no kalibutan, nighulid kandin. No ka mgo otow no ogsasaliu, nasalapian on to igkaratui rin no nigligkat to pogpanhilabot to kono no asawa rin.”
poros
Ian su nataga ki to tu-tuu ian ka sikan no Balaod to Magboboot dongan no impahatod to mgo diwata no suguanon din. No agad hontow no niglop-ang to agad nokoy no insugu din woy ko waro nigpaagad-agad, niglogparan on sikandin to litos to salo din.
domdom
agad kai pad to tano, ogbogayan to Magboboot sikandin to subla pad to pig-ongkoran din, no uromo ko diad on sikandin to Langit, ogbogayan sikandin to kouyagan no waro katamanan.”
No pogkaponga ran on to pog–ampu, duon intagu dan to taguanan no og-indanan to ngaran to otow no ka ogkapurut no ngaran, ian ka ogkaalam. Si Matias no ngaran ka napurut no sikan ian ka naalam no suguanon no igliwan ki Hudas. Nò, nakaamut on si Matias to tahan no sampulu woy sagboka no suguanon ni Hisus.
Ka sikan no katabolog, kanta ka ogkaligot, no ko og-alipolongan ki, ian ogkaligot ka ogpitawon ta
ogpo-ul-uli-oy to goinawa
To pogligad ka igkalima no allow, si Ananias no ian Labow no Talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu, nigsundul on dio to Sisaria ligkat to Hirusalim. Duon mgo pogbuyagon to mgo Hudiu woy sagboka no abogaru no si Tirtulu no nanduma kandin. Innangon dan ki Gobirnador Pilik ka igbayung dan ki Pablo.
Pinayagan ka gakit.
Ian su ka kagi to Magboboot, manokal woy mabogbog. Magmagalang pad to balarow no daruwa so galang to irob no ogpokougsob to mgo lolonguan to mgo oongatan woy dio to utok to mgo bokog. Ian su ka kagi rin, oglagbas to kinaraloman ta, ka gimukud ta woy ka goinawa ta oyow ogkatagaan ka tibo no mgo doromdom ta woy ka tu-tuu ian no goinawa ta.
Nig-inso dan si Hisus to, “Nokoy ka katondanan nu to soini no oghimuon nu? Hontow ka nigbogoy koykow to katondanan nu?”
Saksakon ka ko kai ka to longod ku.
Woy ligkat dod to koykow no Gimukud, duon impanangon nu ki Dabid no kaap–apuan noy woy suguanon nu. No kagi rin to, ‘Manio naan ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no ogkabolu to Magboboot, woy ka doromdom to mgo Hudiu, no songo waro man pulus?
wayawaya
kalamuging
kolaab
Konò ogkatibug no ogtoi-on ta
“Amo, ko litos nu, awaa nu ka soini no igkabaybayari ku no ian ogkounawaan ka mapoit lagboy no inumanon, di konon ka koddi no koiniatan ka igbogoy nu. Ka koykow ro no koiniatan igbogoy nu koddi.”
suloy
Naparagas do moulii. Malinis on ka lawa rin.
Di mgo sulod, ka lagboy no ig-udling ku kaniu, soini ian. Ko duon ignangon ta, kono ki ogpangulibot no oghingaranan ta ka langit woy ko soini no kalibutan woy ko agad nokoy. Ko duon ig-inso kanta, ogtabak ki ro to, “Hoo,” woy ko “Kono a.” Og-iling ki ro to oyow kono ki ogkabobootan to Magboboot to iglogpad din.
Ka otow no nigdarampil to homoy malasi rin ogkoilon.
Woy warad on ogpakaboli to mgo mohomut no ig-anag no ogkohingaranan no sinamun, woy ka mgo paminta, woy ko ka igmohomut to lawa woy ka mohomut no igtomog. Songo waro ogpakaboli to mgo inumanon dan, woy ko lana, woy ka maroyow no harina ran woy ka tirigu, woy ka mgo ayam dan no baka, woy ko karniru, woy ka mgo kalisa ran, woy ko mgo uripon woy ko mgo gimukud to mgo otow.
kogò
Ka kinagian aku, konò ogko-unawa to atu. Lo-in ka tu-ud to sikan.
Warò otow no pig-umaag din ko konon pinog-unawa rò. Warò ogdo-isokon
Ko dio pad to woig to Hordan si Huan, nanghondio kandin ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no nigpuun dio to mgo lunsud, mgo hilit duon to probinsia to Hudia lagkos to mgo otow no taga Hirusalim no lunsud. Ko nig-abin dan ka mgo salo dan dio to Magboboot, nigbautismuan ni Huan sikandan dio to woig to Hordan.
Kagi ni Pedro ki Hisus to, “Nangoni koy to kalitukan to pananglitan no innangon nu ganna bahin to igmaligsom to otow.”
Natagaan now ka in-anad dongan to kaap-apuan tanow no insapad ka ogpamunu, su ka otow no ogbunu ogtangko to talaghusoy.
Ong-ongora nu to kalayati.
gakap
duhù
ka
balakayu
dakol ka igkohoy-u to Magboboot kanta. Nò, igpaalap din no ligkat dio to langit no Talagpangabang kanta to salo ta. Ogkounawa sikandin to allow no ogsilo ko masolom su ogkabat-awan ka dalan to mgo otow no ogpokougpo to marusilom woy magaan on poron ogkamatoy. Ko ogpokouma on, og-anaran ki ko hondoi dapit ka dalan ta oyow ogmaawang ka goinawa ta.” Sikan do ka kagi no impakagi to Gimukud to Magboboot ki Sakarias tongod to anak din no si Huan.
Ot-otobon ki.
timpuruk
Some people are quick to curse [others] if they are angry at their companion(s).
Woy songo nignangonan kud sikaniu to insabal on si Hisus di to igkatatolu on no allow ligkat to pogkamatoy rin, nigbootan do to Magboboot to oyow ogkouyag on. Ka sikan, songo nounawa to impasulat din dongan.
asin
Ka amag, ian igbat-ow noy to dalan noy.
lirong
Ka otow no ogboli to wasoy, ognanoynanoy ka ogpitow su ka maroyow, ogku-on din.
Nig-inso din, “Hondoi now isabal?” Kagi ran, “Duma ka, Buyag, pitow ka.”
Ian su og-awoson to ogkatuman ka sikan no impasulat to Magboboot bahin koddi. Soini ka impasulat din, ‘Inlagkos sikandin to mgo makasasalo.’ ” Kagi ni Hisus, “Ka sikan no ingkasulat dongan bahin koddi, ogbunsud on ogkatuman.”
kilki
purut
Ian su ko duon goinawa ta to ogbogoy, ogtinawoon to Magboboot ko nokoy ka igkabogoy ta su ian din do ipatalad kanta ka ligkat to ogkagongonan ta.
No sikanta no nigtuu on kandin ka ogkounawa to lawa rin. No ligkat to pogboot ni Hisus kanta, ogkasagboka kinow ro. No ian ogkounawaan ka lawa ta no duon ugat no ogpakatongos to bokog ta woy ogpakamakogal to lawa ta. No ian to oyow ogkaayun tibo ka pogsumpulsumpul to lawa ta woy to oyow ogkohimu on no sagboka ro ian no lawa. No ko litos ka pogtuman ta to katondanan no ingkabogoy to tag sagboka kanta, ogtulin ka soini no lawa ni Hisus woy ogmanokal no ogligkat to ogmarakdakoloy kinow tibo to goinawa.
bunsilow
Nigdinog ka mgo otow no ogmanasasindog dio ka daging do no nignangon to lugung do duon. Di kagi to duma, “Nigkagian sikandin to diwata no suguanon to Magboboot.”
Oghagsilon ki su ogdaralu ki.
Duon a dio to kandan, woy sikoykow, duon ka kai to koddi oyow ogkasagboka lagboy sikandan to goinawa ran. Sikan oyow ogkataga ka mgo waro nigtuu to nigsugu a nu woy duon goinawa nu kandan no un-unawa ka goinawa nu dii to koddi.
patow
kopù
Omunaan, nigtabak si Huan kandan tibo to, “Sikoddi, ogbautismuan ku sikaniu to woig di duon dod otow no ogpokouma no labow pad koddi ka katondanan din. Doisok do ka koddi no katondanan agad to oghokad to mgo sandal din. Ko sikandin, ogbautismuan kow rin to Gimukud to Magboboot woy hapuy.”
balun
Waro man igmalogot dan to soini no igbayungbayung dan kanak.
Duon otow no nig–unug to sikan no batasan to ogpanduwad to tano. Ka ngaran din, si Husi no ian angga din si Birnabi su sikan ka inghingaran to mgo suguanon ni Hisus kandin. Ka lituk to angga din, talagbulig to goinawa. Pinanganak ni Libi si Birnabi no dio mootow to pulu Sipri.
dilò
Duon dod allow no nigsolod man do si Hisus dio to anaranan to mgo og-ampu. Songo duon dio ka songo lukos no noumil ka limang no bolad din.
Ko og-ampu ka, ogsolod ka to mgo sinabong nu dio to baloy now. Lokobi nu ka gumawan oyow kono ka ogkitoon. Nò, ampu ka dio to Amoy now no Magboboot no kono ogkitoon sikandin. Agad kono ka ogkitoon to duma nu, ogkitoon ka rod to Magboboot woy sikandin ka ogbogoy koykow to igsayo.
Tobtobi nu ka ulobang
saa
kulung
talò
No nigsaluuban dan si Hisus to malayat no kinabo no moitom-itom no indanan to songo igdatu. Nighimu ran dod ka ogkounawa to kogos di nohimu no dugi no nigsalapid dan. Soini ka panag-ilingan dan do no kogos to igdatu no insaluug dan to ulu ni Hisus.
To nigsilo do ka allow, dio to pantad ogsasindog si Hisus. Di waro pad tokora to mgo hibatoon din to si Hisus ian.
Ognangonan ku sikaniu, ko nokoy ka igsapad now kai to kalibutan, oghoo ka Magboboot dio to langit. Woy ko nokoy ka igtugut now kai to kalibutan songo oghoo ka Magboboot dio to langit.
dalom
Nigluhud no nigpooy-u-hoy-u sikandin to tangkaan to datu no kagi rin to, ‘Bogayi a bag nikoykow to pila no mgo allow no ogpammitow a to igbayad ku koykow su ogbayaran ku ka tibo no utang ku koykow.’
hugun
tampak
Pogkaponga to alukuyan dan, nig–indanan dan ka allow no iglimudlimud dan man do. No pogkouma to sikan no allow, mohon–ing ka nalimud dio to baloy no nig–ugpaan ni Pablo. Ligkat to masolom taman to nahapunan on, innangonnangon ni Pablo kandan tongod to pandatuan to Magboboot. Woy ligkat to mgo ingkasulat dongan to Balaod ni Moisis woy to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, impamalogot din to si Hisus ka nigtuon dan. Ian su og–ol–olog porom si Pablo no ogpatuuon sikandan ki Hisus.
Konad ogpakako-on ka tagtu-un; katanan man.
No nigpohoy-uhoy-u ka mgo busow dio ki Hisus to, “Pohondia koy nasi to sikan no mgo babuy. Dio koy pasolora to mgo babuy.”
Sikaniu, ogboboot kow ro to kaniu no ogdoromdoman. Di sikoddi atag, kono a ogboboot to agad hontow.
Natokow ki ki Amutatoy to’gpanumbaoy to bigtas to kausiloman.
Ogsosob-ung ka otow to baloy rin oyow konò ogko-uranan.
Ogpangini-kinì ka paa rin no noiling to burunsi no nakasugbuk to hapuy. No ka lagong din, maagbot lagboy no ogkoiling to nigdagunut to sampow.
Nò, waro a man nigpaginpulus kaniu ligkat to agad sagboka no otow no nigsugu ku dio to kaniu.
Duon do ian mataman ka mgo otow no nigpamminog ki Pablo taman to nighingaranan din ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. No nigbabansagon sikandan to, “Himatayi now on ka soini no otow. Himatayi now on. Konad no litos to duon pad goinawa.”
bukbuk
Mgo sulod, duon mgo otow no ognangon to og-anad a kun to og-awoson ta rod to ogpatuli ki. Di ko tu-tuu pa ka sikan, manio naan to ogbaybayaran a rod to mgo Hudiu? Su ko og-anad a rod to og-awoson ta to ogpatuli, kono poron ogkabolu sikandan ko songo ig-anad ku ka kamatayon ni Hisus no igliwan kanta no mgo makasasalo.
Nò, duon kagi to Magboboot no nigpuun dio to taliwaro to sikan no gapun. Kagi, “Soini ka Anak ku no nig-alam kud; pamminog kow kandin.”
takub
Pananglitan, dio to kaniu no nigtuu on ki Hisus, duon mgo otow no tahan on natuli no waro pad abina ni Hisus. Ignangon ku kandan to oyow kono dan ogbalowbalawan ka lawa ran no ig-awo to impatokod dan. No ka duma now no tahan no waro natuli no naabin on ni Hisus, ignangon ku to oyow kono dan igpatuli.
Ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, waro mataga to Balaod no ingkasulat ni Moisis. Di agad to waro dan matagoi, duon dod ogkatuman dan to sikan no Balaod su duon katagaanan dan dio to goinawa ran no ogpakaanad kandan ko nokoy ka maroyow no oghimuon dan. No ka sikan, ogkounawa to duon balaod no tahan no nakatagu to goinawa ran.
sipò
Woy nigmaagbot ka pog-opad dan to, “Litos no ogkasayo ka Nati no Karniru no nighimatayan nokani. Dakol ka kabogbogan din. Sikandin ka tagtuun to tibo no kalaglagan kai to kalibutan. Woy malayat ka pogdoromdom din. Manokal sikandin no ogtahuron ta, ogsimboon ta woy ogsayoon tanow.”
malapanit
Di duon duma no mgo otow no ogsusumpalit no nigkagi sikandan to, “Ah, ian ogpakarogil si Hisus to mgo busow su ka kabogbogan din to ogdogil no dio ian ogpuun to igbuyag to mgo busow.” Ian ka kagi dut mgo nigsusumpalit.
Pogdinog to sagboka no boi no duon anak din no boi no nigbusawan to duon on si Hisus nig-agpas nighondio kandin no nigluhud dio to tangkaan din.
Dokad di, nataga koy to, ka ogpakamaroyow to otow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, kono ogligkat to mgo pogtuman ta to Balaod din, di ogligkat do atag to pogtuu ta ro ki Hisu Kristu. No agad sikanami no Hudiu, ian to nigtuu koy on su nig-awos to oyow ogkohimu kinow on no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot su ligkat to pogtuu ta ki Kristu, no kono atag ogligkat to mgo pogtuman ta to Balaod ni Moisis. Ian su waro agad hontow no ogkohimu on no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot ko ligkat to mgo pogtuman to Balaod.
solod
limorang
Ognangonan ku sikaniu to uromo, to allow to poglogpad to Magboboot to mgo otow, malmalomu pad ka iglogpad din to mgo matig Suduma to iglogpad din kaniu.”
Di nahallok lagboy ian sikandan su natokawan no nahan dan buwa no ian dan ogkitoon ka gimukud to namatoy.
Agad hondoi koy ogpakarolog, ungod koy ogpakatangko to kamatayon noy no ogkounawa koy rod ki Hisus. No ian to soini ka ogkabayaan noy su oyow ka pogkouyag ni Hisus, songo ogtokoron kai to soini no mgo lawa noy.
Ogtulin ka dagat woy og-os-os.
Nig-inso ka mgo hibatoon din to, “Di hondoi ki ogkita to paan no litos to tibo soini no mgo otow no mariu ki to lunsud?”
No kuntoon, nohimu kow on no duma ku to pog-aguanta to igkabaybayari ku no nigkita now dii to kanak nokani woy songo ogdinogon now no ogkaaguanta ku kuntoon.
kobot
Di dio to langit woy ka kai to tano woy ka dio to diralom to tano, waro litos to ogbolat woy to ogbasa to sikan no ogbasoon.
No ian ta igtagad to oyow magaan poron ogdatong ka sikan no allow to Magboboot no ogkasilaban on ka tibo no dio to langit woy ogkatunow on ka tibo ligkat to subla on ian lagboy ka koinit.
Gus ka nog im to kap?
Kagi to mgo Hudiu kuwo ki Hisus, “Waro pad nokouma ka kalimmaan no tuid no inkootow nu no nakakita kad ki Abraham! Ka ku kow!”
Kono ogkasipod sikandan no oghimu to agad nokoy no maroot no ogkoiniatan dan. Woy kono dan ogkaponod ka goinawa ran su ogparagason dan ka pogtuman to agad nokoy no mgo maroot no batasan dan.
pandawit
palomdom
Pananglitan, ko du-on ogpangasawa, no ian dò ogka-alukuy ko songo monu ka igbotad no gastu to sikan no boi.
kayow
Ka sunud no Allow ran to Oghimoloy, magaan on ogkoubus ka mgo otow dio to sikan no lunsud no nanlimudlimud no ogpamminog to kinagian to Magboboot.
gimukud
Ko ogmanggi-anak on ka manuk, og-inagak on to mgo piak din ko ogpangalkal no ogpamanghò to igpako-on to anak din.
Sikan ian, ogkataga ki to ogkohoy-uan to Magboboot ko hontow ka ogkoiniatan din no ogkohoy-uan. Di ogpapagkolon din ka otow no kono ogpaagad-agad ko boot din to ogpapagkolon.
Ka mgo otow no no-umaan diò to “pool” to du-on nalonod no duma ran, no-upul sikandan ko ogmonuon dan to ogpangabang.
Sikan ian to si Kristu ka ignangonnangon noy dio to agad hontow otawa. No ligkat to tibo no katouanan noy, igbohog noy woy ig-anad noy to kandan. Ian su oyow uromo, ogkaalap noy sikandan dio to tangkaan to Magboboot no ogkakitaan on to natibulus on ka tag sagboka no goinawa ran dio ki Kristu.
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, su nohimu koy no suguanon ni Hisu Kristu, ogkounawa to nohimu koy no lawa to Magboboot to og-alap to ignangon din kaniu. Nò, su ligkat to nohimu ni Hisu Kristu, ogbuyu koy kaniu oyow ogpoul-ulioy kow on to goinawa to Magboboot.
Og-iman-iman ki to du-on kanta no karoyawon.
Kagi ni Pedro, “Manio to nigpasabsabutoy kow to og–ol–ologan now ka Magboboot? Nò, magaan on oglopow ka mgo otow no niglobong to asawa nu. Songo ogkaalap kad nikandin dio to lobonganan.”
sungku
hugyup
Kuntoon, mgo sulod, su duon katondanan noy no ogligkat to ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu, duon igsapad noy kaniu to kono kow on ogdumaruma to mgo otow no ogtuu di kono ogtalabau no kono og-unug to batasan no in-anad noy kaniu.
Si Aristarku no duma ku kai no songo napirisu, ogpangumusta kaniu. Si Markos no sulod ni Birnabi, songo ogpangumusta kaniu. Ko ogpakatood sikandin no oghondio to kaniu, sagmana now sikandin unawa to hun-a no impaalap ku kaniu no tugun.
“Di ka otow no kona a rin og-abinon dio to tangkaan to mgo otow songo kono ku sikandin og-abinon dio to tangkaan to Amoy ku no dio to langit.”
Nò, to diad si Hisus to tangkaan to gobirnador no nig-insaan sikandin to, “Sikoykow ka Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu?” Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Sikan ian ka kagi nu.”
Nò, pogliwaro to marusilom, nigpakita ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus dio ki Pablo. Kagi ni Hisus to, “Kono ka ogkahallok su unawa to impamalogot nu ka kinagian ku kai to Hirusalim, songo og–awoson no igpamalogot nu rod dio to Ruma.”
Ka alamara dongan, maro-ot su ogpanhimatoy to warò salò.
Du-on otow no og-indan to bakotin din, nigtompugan din ka ikug din
Sikan ian ka og-ongkoran to lukos ka amoy rin mgo inoy rin oyow ogkasagboka sikandin to asawa rin.
Nig-insaan ni Hisus ka amoy to bato to, “Kon-u niggoram ka bato to soini?” Kagi to amoy, “Ko molintok pad bag sikandin!
lungun
Nigtabak sikandan, “Oghimatayan din sikandan no mgo maroot no mgo talagbantoy woy ogpasoipan din to dangob no mgo otow no ogbogoy kandin to igtalad din ko tigbogas on to ubas.”
Ko ogkatabolog ki to ma-agbot, ogpoko-ilob ki.
Di si Kristu atag, kasagboka ro ka ingkatubad din no oglitos to ig-awo to salo ta taman to waro katamanan. No to napongaan on ka sikan, nigpinpinnuu on dio to kawanan to Magboboot.
Ogkagi to buyag, "Purut ka to manuk no igkuyab nu ig-awò to maro-ot no balò nu."
saya
Dio to mgo nigtuu ki Hisus to Antiokia, duon mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot woy mgo talag–anad to kinagian din. Ka ngaran dan, si Birnabi, si Simion no ian angga din si Moitom, si Lusiu no taga Sirini, si Manain no dio nigdakol sikandin to baloy ni Gobirnador Hirodis. Woy duon si Saulo.
panumbilang
ingkù
pa-a to limukon
Hari din no tu-un din.
korò
diwata
Ko ogkaboros ka boi, ogburut ka gotok din; sikan ka ogkotol.
An-anayan, narago kow lagboy! Manio to ogkoiling kow on kuntoon? Di ogpakamalogot a kaniu to lagboy no maroyow ka goinawa now kanak nokani. Ko nohimu pa to ogkaloko, ka mata now, imbogoy now poron kanak.
Di innangon to Magboboot ki Abraham to uromo, ogkohimu ka mgo pinanganak din no agpot dio to mariu no ugpaan dio to loin no mgo otow. No ogko–uripon pad woy ogkabaybayaran ka mgo pinanganak din taman to hop–at no gatus no tuid.
Manuk no mangu-ugpò to hantal din
Ka duma, ogkagamut ka ighilu to ambow.
Nigparakop porom si Hisus to sika mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu su nakasabut to kagi ni Hisus to sikandan ka pighisugat din to pananglitan din. Di nahallok sikandan to sika mohon-ing no mgo otow no nalibulung no ian wa dan dakopa. Nokogsuwoy on sikandan.
Si Tikiku, impohondio ku to lunsud to Episu.
Diò to kanami, og-awoson to matapid ki oyow konò ki ogkaboinan
hanow
No soini ka ogbasoon din to ingkasulat ni Isaias to Tahan no Kasulatan no kagi to Magboboot to: “Ian din ogkounawaan ka karniru su kono ogngangang ko oghimatayan. Woy songo ogkounawaan din ka nati to karniru su agad ogkagisan ka bulbul, di kono ogkagi.
Ogkalingawan tad ka duma ta ka og-ongkoran ta rò du-on.
pulitì
Kono tad ogdakoli to goinawa ka salapi. Litos do ko ogkarago ki to kanta no pog-ugpo su nigkagi ka Magboboot to, “Kono ku ogbalagaron sikaniu woy songo kono kow ogkoongkoran.”
nanam
susù
Nò, su sikan ian, og-inso a kaniu ko manio to duon otow dio to kaniu no ogdoisokon din ka nohimu on no sulod din to pogtuu ta, woy duon dod duma no ogsumansuman to madmaroyow ka kandin no batasan dio to tangkaan to Magboboot? Kono no litos ka sikan su uromo, tibo kinow ogpakasasindog dio to tangkaan to Magboboot no sikandin ka ogboboot tongod to tag sagboka kanta ko litos ka mgo batasan ta.
Kohoy-u ka mgo ogkaboros woy ka duon pad ogsusu no bato dan su dakol ka igkabaybayari no ogpokouma to mgo otow kai to soini no ugpaan,” kagi ni Hisus, “woy dakol ka igkabolu to Magboboot to soin no mgo otow.
babuy
harok
Sikan ian to og-awoson to, ka to mgo otow no ogtuu, waro maroot no batasan din no igkoogot kandin. Woy og-awoson to sagboka ro ka asawa rin no kono ogpanlibug woy kono ogmagolgol to agad nokoy, woy ogkatapid so goinawa rin no molungangon, woy maroyow ka pogsagman din to mgo magaliug din, woy ogkatou sikandin no og-anad to mgo otow.
pusung
Maroyow sikandin no otow su igparatong din ka salapì diò to tagtu-un to agoloy.
Ian su ka kabogbogan to mgo kuddo to igpanghimatoy to mgo otow, ogligkat to mgo bo-bo dan woy to ikug dan, su dio to koopusan to mgo ikug dan, duon ulu no ogkoiling to ulod no ogpokohisakit to mgo otow.
hugun
bubung
Og-iman a to sikan no igkatolu no allow to ig-ulì nu.
barungusan
No to pogkouma rin dio to Antiokia, lagboy no narago su pigkita rin on to nohoy–uan to Magboboot sikandan. No nig–os–osonan din sikandan to oyow ogkohogot dan ka pogtuu ran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus oyow agad ogkoomonu, ogmasalig ka pogtuu ran.
Poglibuwas to sikan no obol, duon mgo talangas no nanlibuwas on kai to tano. Woy nigbogayan sikandan to kabogbogan to oghisakit to otow no ogkoiling to alas to pogkagat to salipitsipit.
su duon ingkasulat dongan no kinagian to Magboboot to: “Waro otow no ogpakabatuk to doromdom to Magboboot, woy kono din og-awoson ko duon otow no ogtambag kandin.
bantang
pulù
pakun
No ligkat to sikan no allow, olin on maroyow ka goinawa ni Pilatu woy si Hirodis, su to wa pad ka sikan no allow no impaalap ni Pilatu si Hisus dio ki Hirodis, patalausig pad sikandan.
Ka sikan no mgo batasan no ogligkat to mgo Balaod no ingkasulat dongan ki Moisis, tigbal do no mgo alung no ingkatuon to mgo otow to sikan no waro pad dongan matuman. Di si Kristu ka nakatuman to sikan no impananglitan dan.
amboy
gapas
No kuntoon,” kagi ni Pablo, “Soini ad on to tangkaan nu su og–in–insaan a tongod to pogtuu ku to sikan no insabut to Magboboot dongan to mgo kaap–apuan noy.
Agad nokoy ka igsayo noy ko og-ampu koy to Magboboot, kono man ogpakasosokod to dakol no igkarago noy to pogtuu now ki Hisus.
Ka sikan no sampulu no sukat no nigkita nud, ian ka sampulu no mgo labow no datu no waro pad mabogayi to katondanan to pog-alap to pandatuan dan. Di ogbogayan sikandan to sikan no katondanan no ogpakalagkos to pandatuan to sikan no magintalunan. Di ka pog-alap dan to pandatuan dan, magaan do ogkatampod no ogkoiling do to songo uras.
tu-u
Ian su marusilom ka pogkasabuti ran. Waro labot dan to sikan no kouyagan no igbogoy to Magboboot kanta. Ian su waro mataga sikandan to tu-tuu ian no dalan, woy su kono dan ogkoiniatan ka tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon.
Ka sikan no woig, ogkaanlas-anlas dio to taliwaro to dalan to sikan no lunsud. No dio to mgo ilis to sikan no woig, duon kayu no ogpakabogoy to kouyagan. Tag songo bulan ogbogas, no ka sampulu woy daruwa ka pogbogas dan to songo tuid. No ka mgo dohun din, ogpakabulung to masakit to mgo otow no dio to agad hondoi no mgo ugpaan kai to kalibutan.
Agad nokoy ka ogkabayaan ta, ungod ta ro ogsayoon ka Magboboot su sikan ka imboot din kanta no nasagboka ki Hisu Kristu.
No songo tuid woy hon–om no bulan ka pog–ugpo ni Pablo dio to Kurintu no nig–anad to kinagian to Magboboot.
Ka sikan no ignangon ku kaniu, ian su duon mgo otow no ogpasuwoy poron kaniu.
Sikan ian no nigtungayow rin on ka Magboboot woy ka langit woy ka tibo no og-ugpo to langit no ian ugpaan to Magboboot.
sapiliu
Ko nigdinog ka inoy ni Hisus mgo hari rin to sikan, nigligkat sikandan no oghondio to datongan din oyow kandan ka og-angoy kandin su duon kagi to mgo otow to naangol kun on si Hisus.
Ka otow nigbul-uy to asu rin to babuy ka tagapalì to saulungag.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Nignangonan kow on di wa kow nigtuu. Ka koddi no pighimu to ngaran to Amoy ku no Magboboot, sikan ian ka igkataga now to pigsugu a rin.
balibad
No ka tahan no doromdom ta, ogliwanan ta to doromdom no ogligkat to iam no pogkouyag ta. No ka sikan, ogpokounug kid to batasan to Magboboot no matuwarong woy ogpakaayun ki to goinawa rin no waro salo.
bongkag
wolwol
Poomot kow to pog-ampu now. Ngilam kow woy parumooy now ka pogpasalamat now to Magboboot.
Du-on otow no konò ogkasaligan no ogpammurut to kalaglagan ku.
Duon dod kagi ni Hisus kandan to pananglitan. Kagi rin, “Tibo ki, ogkoumaan ki to igkabaybari ta. Duon pulus to igkabaybayari ta dio to goinawa ta no ogkounawa to duon pulus to asin ko duon to ngalap ta. Di ko ogkaawo ka koomisi to sikan no asin, ogkoomonu to ogliwan to nanam? Kono ogkaliwan. Nò, duon ka ogkounawa to asin dio to kaniu kuntoon. Bantayi now su sikan ka igpouwaan to goinawa now.”
Di agad mohirap kaniu ka sakit ku, di waro a now ang-anggoi woy waro a now lomoti. Di ka pogsagman now atag kanak, ian ku ogkoilingan ko songo diwata a pa to Magboboot ka nigdatong woy ko si Hisu Kristu ka nokouma.
bantug
No ka dangob no batasan dan no konon litos, oggawayan dan ka mgo boi no nabalu oyow og-agawan dan ka igkouyag dan woy ko mgo baloy to sikan no mgo balu. Di ogholosan dan ka goinawa ran no maroot to ogmalayaton dan ka pog-ampu dan. Dakol lagboy uromo ka iglogpad to Magboboot to sikan no mgo otow,” kagi ni Hisus.
siling
nigdakol ka goinawa
Ka katkat, darua ka igsandig no du-on ka igbalabag, no ian ka katkat.
Kono ogkohoy-u to duma ran woy kono dan oglokaan ka mgo igkabolu dan. Malasi ogpamayung to duma no otow, no ogtumanon dan ka agad nokoy no ogkoiniatan dan. Mabulut sikandan no waro goinawa ran to maroyow.
“Nokoy pad,” kagi ni Hisus, “ka kakoy, dio dod to kamot to nokouma ka hari rin. To pog-uli din no nigligkat dio to kamot, to nigmarani rin on to baloy, pigdinog din ka mgo otow no ogpanguglung woy ogsasayow.
Agad to waro kow makakita ki Hisus, di dakol ka goinawa now kandin. No agad kono kow pad kuntoon ogpakakita kandin, nigtuu kow rod kandin. Sikan ian no ogkarago kow to dakol lagboy no igkarago no kono ogkalituk.
Ko duon otow no ogbayung koykow woy og-alapon ka dio to talaghusoy, maroyow ko ogpohushusayoy kow pa to wa kow pad mokouma dio to talaghusoy, su ko kono kow pad ogpasabuton to maroyow, og-alapon ka rin on dio to talaghusoy. Igbogoy ka dio to pulis no ogkapirisu kad on.
Duon mgo otow dio no nabolu no nigmal-alukuyoy no kagi ran, “Nokoy buwa ka pulus to pigdaat din ka sika lana?
Duon nigsulat to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan no kagi ran, ‘Og-anaron to Magboboot ka tibo no mgo otow.’ ” Sikan ka nakasulat. Nò, sikan no mgo otow no ogdinog no ogkaanad to Magboboot, ogtuu ka sika otow koddi.
Kagi ni Istiban to, “Pitow kow. Ogkita a to langit no naboklas on. Woy ogkitoon ku ka Otow no oghingaranan ta to Kakoy to mgo Koot–otawan no dio mogsasindog to kawanan to Magboboot.”
bunanat
Natibag koy
bunow
lantas
tubung
amagal
olod
tagub
Sumsumana now ka asawa ni Lot.
No, doromdoma now ka soini. Ligkat to tibo no karoyawon to pog-ugpo now, talari now ka otow no og-anad kaniu to kinagian to Magboboot.
Wà natu-oni no boi
Di ka suguanon atag no nigbogayan do to songo libu nighipanow woy inlobong din ka salapi to igbuyag din dio to tano.
Ogpamakul koy bag kunto-on to golut to mundù su nakasilab koy to kamot noy.
Ka balaod, ian ta igpanag-ilingan ka boi no duon pad asawa rin. Kagi to balaod, ko duon boi no manokal pad ka tahan no asawa, kono no litos no oghutuk no ogkaasawa sikandin. Di ko ogkamatoy on ka asawa rin, litos on no oghutuk no ogkaasawa ka boi su naawo on sikandin to katondanan to sikan no balaod tongod to tahan no asawa rin.
Nò, nighipanow on dio to lanow no nan-untud to balutu no nighondio to awayan.
baliung
Nò, nighondio si Husi ki Pilatu su nigbuyu to lawa ni Hisus no namatoy.
Kuntoon, duon ignangon ku kaniu no kono no Hudiu. Sikanak no si Pablo, nohimu a no suguanon ni Hisu Kristu to oyow ogpakanangonnangon a kaniu tongod kandin. Sikan ian ka ogtibuuson ku ka katondanan ku,
Nò, ko nig-uyag to Magboboot si Hisu Kristu ligkat to kamatayon din, nohimu kid on no nasagboka ki Hisus ka mgo nigtuu on kandin. Woy ingkalagkos kinow rin ki Hisu Kristu no nigbogayan to Magboboot sikandin to katondanan to pog-alap to pandatuan no dio to Langit.
No kagi ran ki Hisus to “Maistru, duon nigsulat ni Moisis dongan to sugu kanta. Kagi, ‘Ko ogkamatoy ka songo lukos no duon dod ka asawa rin di waro anak dan, og-awos to og-asawoon ka sikan no balu to hari to namatoy oyow duon porom anak to kakoy rin.’
tapulog
pigkit
Sikaniu, konò kow ogpa-agbot ka ogna-asna-as su du-on on noirogò.
bongkug
To pogkita rin to salapi din, oglimuron din ka mgo amigu rin woy ka mgo sugkud din woy ogkagian din sikandan to, ‘Oghimu ki to dakol no igkarago su pigkita kud on ka salapi ku no bulawan no nalagak,’ ” kagi to boi.
Nohimu ka sikan su oyow duon daruwa no kono ogkahalin no ogpakamalogot to kono ogtalis ka kagi to Magboboot, ka pogpangulibot din woy ka kono og-ubat. Omunaan to sikanta no nakaaput kid kandin, ogkabuligan ka goinawa ta oyow ogkohirosonan tad ka poggongon to sikan no im-imanan ta to tibo no innangon din.
‘Agad ka basak to soin no lunsud now, ogtopungan noy no igpo-indan noy kaniu to warad on labot noy kaniu. Di indani now ka inkagi noy kaniu to nigmarani kow poron to Pogsugu to Magboboot.’ ” Ian ka innangon ni Hisus to mgo hibatoon din.
No nigdakop din on ka dakol no ulod no ogkohingaranan to daragun. Sikandin si Satanas no ian igbuyag to mgo busow. No nigbanggutan to diwata ka sikan no ulod woy indogpak din dio to bitu no kono ogkatogkad ka karalomi rin. No niglokoban din woy nigsusian woy duon indanan to bo-bo to sikan no bitu oyow kono ogpakalibuwas woy kono ogkoubatan to ulod ka mgo otow taman to ogkapongaan on ka songo malan no tuid. Di pogkaponga to sikan, ogpalibuwason pad sikandin to magaan do.
Nò, dio to Hirusalim, nigdinog ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus to duon mgo taga Samaria no nigtuu on to kinagian to Magboboot. Sikan ian to nigpohondio dan on si Pedro woy ki Huan dio to kandan.
Nò, sikan no mgo otow dio to probinsia to Hudia awoson no ogsalsalia dio to mgo kabubunganan.
“Ogmonuon tad naan ka sikan no daruwa no otow, su tu–tuu ian to duon mabogbog no indanan no nohimu, woy natagaan on to tibo no mgo otow kai to lunsud to Hirusalim. No kono ki man ogpakakagi to waro su natagaan dan on ka tibo no nohimu.
To diad on to Bitlihim sikandan, no natuman on ian ka ig-anak ni Maria.
Woy nu ogkapurut ko du-on on ka ig-indan no oghimu to sabut ko kon-u ogkagampusi -- ka ogkatibò on ka igbayad.
To nighipanow woy si Hisus, nokouma on dio to songo lunsud. Sikan ka ugpaan to songo boi no oghingaranan ki Marta no sikandin ka nigsagman kandan dio to baloy rin.
No kouma on ka allow no oghingaranan dan no Pintikustis. No ka mgo nigtuu, nanlimudlimud on dio to songo baloy.
tuman
ganti
Nan-untud to balutu no ogtalipag poron dio to doipag to lanow no oghondio porom to Kapirnaum. Nigmarusilom do duon no wa pad makasundul si Hisus dio to kandan.
Sikan ian to nanhipanow on woy si Pablo su nigsugu on to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to Antiokia. Dio mogbayo to mgo probinsia to Pinisia woy to Samaria. No dio to agad hondoi no lunsud no nabayaan dan, nigbatbatan dan ka mgo nigtuu to mohon–ing ka nigtuu on no kono no Hudiu. No ka mgo nigtuu no dio to mgo nabayaan dan, narago lagboy to pigdinog dan.
Sikan ian, ka salo to sagboka ro no otow no si Adan, ian nigligkatan to ogkalogparan ka tibo no mgo otow. Songo ogkounawa rod su ka maroyow no nighimu to sagboka ro no otow no si Hisus, ian ligkatan to ogkapasaylu ka tibo no mgo otow no ogtuu kandin woy ogkabogayan sikandan to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
Nig-utang ku pad ka kuddò nu no ka sukut, og-inso-on nu ka bayad to kuddò nu.
balugu
Ogpakadoromdom a to sikan no tu-tuu ian no pogtuu nu ki Hisus no an-anayan duon to apu nu no si Loida woy to inoy nu no si Eunis. No kuntoon, nataga a to songo duon on to koykow no goinawa.
Agad duon ka dangob no impasulat to Magboboot nokani no natuman. Kagi, “Oglonghagon to mgo otow ka sikan no otow no narugsuan dan.”
No agad nokoy no ogpakamula poron kanak, kono a ogkoomonu su ogbuligan a rod to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no ogpangabangan a rin taman to ogpasoloron a rin on to pandatuan din no dio to Langit. Maroyow ko ogsayoon ta sikandin to waro katamanan. Malogot ian.
sunggud
Nig-inso si Hisus, “Duon buwa tahan no kagi now to ‘Hop-at pad no bulan woy ki oggaani?’ No ogkagian ku sikaniu no ogpitawon now ka mgo kamot now. Nohinug on ka bogas dan no litos on ian to oggaanion ta.
dalapan
Agal
bundal
Woy ka tibo no mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisus no kai to lunsud to Ruma, woy lagboy on ka mgo otow no nigtuu no og-ugpo to dakol no baloy to labow no igbuyag to soini tibo no mgo ugpaan, songo ogdoromdomon dan sikaniu.
bulus
hukas
Ka otow no ayu-ayu no ungud og-ogoti, ko ogko-ugsoban on to goinawa rin no konad on ogpaka-aguanta ogpaka-atu on sikandin.
Kagi ni Hisus to mgo hibatoon din, “To poghipanow now, kono kow og-alap to agad nokoy. Kono now alapa ka kabil, bolow, salapi, tukod, agad to duma no kinabo, kono now alapa.
dulug
Ko mahapun on, ogsabukan to otow ka pulutan diò to tanò oyow ogsolod ka magianak no manuk no ogpunpunon.
Ogbukbukon ta ka agung no oglisagon ta ka gimbal.
tungop
To pog-ongkod din to mgo otow no nalimud, nigsolod si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din dio to baloy no nig-inso ka mgo hibatoon din ko nokoy ka lituk to sikan no pananglitan din to mgo otow.
Ian su kono no litos no duon ogkapirisu no igpaalap ku ki Sisar to kono a ogpakanangon kandin ko nokoy ka igkabayung to mgo otow kandin,” kagi ni Pistu.
pano-ug
Unayan ta si Maria.
Katulinpas ka papil
Ka ignangon ku kaniu, magaan din ogbuligan ka mgo sakup din. Di koddi no ian Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan, ko oglibong a uromo kai to tano, pila ro buwa ka mgo otow no ogtuu koddi?”
agpu-anan
No nigtabak ka sikan no hop-at no mgo hinimu. Kagi ran to, “Malogot ian” Woy nigluhud on man doka sikan no mgo pogbuyagon no ogsimboon dan sikandin.
Dokad di, waro a mataga ko nokoy ka igkanangon ku ki Sisar tongod ki Pablo,” kagi ni Pistu. “Sikan ian to igpatangko ku pad si Pablo kaniu. No lagboy ku no maroyow ko sikoykow, Buyag Agripa, ka og–insoinso kandin oyow duon igsulat ku no igpaalap ku ki Sisar tongod ki Pablo.
No, nigduma ran ka nabutud no nabawian dio to mgo Parisiu.
langlanguan
Duon salo to mgo otow no ogkakitaan ta lagboy no ogkatagaan tad to ogkalogparan to Magboboot sikandan. Di duon duma no mgo otow no ogpakasalo di ogpokoholos pad ka salo dan. Di duon allow no ogkabatukan on.
lobut
dopa
irob
Ogkoirapan ka kalabow no ogganuy to kangga no oglinaglag to agoloy ko du-on og-untud.
Ligkat to pogtuu ni Moisis to Magboboot, ko dakol on sikandin, nigligal to oghingaranan sikandin to anak to nig-uyamu kandin no anak to igbuyag to Ehipto.
Ka puspuru, nokogtampak ka lawa rin.
Og-iling ka otow, "Nokoy ka og-abalangon to asu?"
Ka pila buwa no mgo kinagian kai to soini no kalibutan no ka tibo duon lituk.
Woy mog-uma so bitil no nigkokout si Boybayan.
basuk
taga Pirigia, taga Pampilia, taga Ehipto woy duon dod duma ta no dio mogligkat to mgo probinsia to Libya no marani to Sirini. Woy duon mgo agpot no taga Ruma no nan–amut to tinuuan to mgo Hudiu, woy ka mgo Hudiu no tu–tuu no dio mootow to lunsud to Ruma.
Di atag, ka otow no ogparagas no ogsalig koddi woy ogpakaaguanta to igkoirapi rin taman to mohuri no allow sikandin ka ogkabogayan to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
Napolaan ad nigtagad koykow; ganna a rò.
Woohoo, nabindas on ka kinabò din.
Kagi ni Agripa ki Pablo to, “Nahan nu buwa to magaan a nu ogkaalap to ogtuu ki Kristu.”
bugtung
Ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus, nigsayo dan on sikandin, woy nig-uli on sikandan dio to Hirusalim no dakol ka ingkarago dan.
Duon songo otow no nig-inso ki Hisus to, “Buyag, og-inso a koykow ko manalingboka ro ka ogkapangabangan to salo dan?” No nigkagi si Hisus kandin to,
Soini naan do mgo sulod. Ka sikan no mgo otow no ogpogos porom kaniu to ogpatuli kow, ian tuud dan to ogkasayo sikandan to mgo duma ran no Hudiu tongod to pogtuu ran. Ian do ka batasan dan su og-awoson dan to waro og-ogot kandan no ogligkat to pogtuu ran to kamatayon ni Kristu no dio to krus.
gimun
Ka bakulù, ian ka lawa to bo-u-u, woy mgo ulod-ulud unawa to kumang, kambu-oy, punggù, susù, buyukung, silì, bibi, kalaykay.
gumangkal
balak
Inpapitow kud to mgo hibatoon nu di waro makabawi to sakit din.”
Ogkasubid a ko ogsakaru
Ungod ogkasasow ka mgo otow no waro mataga to duon ka Magboboot to sikan. Di ka kaniu no Amoy no Magboboot no dio to langit, tahan din on natagaan ka og-awoson now.
Duon mgo talagkubla to buhis no songo nanhondio ki Huan oyow ogpabautismuan poron ki Huan sikandan. Kagi ran ki Huan to, “Maistru, sikanami naan, nokoy ka litos no oghimuon noy?”
Ko ogboka ka mundù, ogbotu ka tanò di konò pad ogkito-on ka bogas.
Nigparagas si Pablo to, “Ka tibo no mgo Hudiu, nataga to mgo batasan ku ligkat to pogdakol ku dio to kanak no ugpaan woy ka sunud no dio ad on to Hirusalim.
Og-usigon kow to tibo no mgo otow tongod koddi,
Waro dan sagmana ka katagaanan dan poron to dalan no nighimu to Magboboot kandan no litos to oyow ogmaroyow on sikandan dio to tangkaan din. Di nig-ol-olog dan no oghimu to kandan atag no dalan. Sikan ian to waro nig-unug sikandan to dalan no imbogoy to Magboboot no ogpakamaroyow poron kandan dio to tangkaan din.
ungod
dapù
tulud
Duon nigdinog ku to duon otow dio to kaniu no nigtuu ki Hisus di oghimu sikandin to maroot to inoy-inoy rin. Di ka mgo otow no kono ogtuu to Magboboot, waro batasan dan no ogkounawa to sikan.
Sikan ian, agad ko ogkoiling to ogkaalang-alang ka katouanan noy di igkarago noy ko ogkohogot on ka kaniu no pogtuu, su ian noy ig-ampu oyow ungod ogkatimulan ka maroyow no batasan now.
gimon
“Sikanak no si Klaudiu Lisias, ogpangumustoon ku sikoykow no tahuronon no Gobirnador Pilik.
totod
pagal
Ian su agad to Magboboot dod si Hisus woy nig-uunawa ka kabogbogan dan, nigbalagad din ko kono ogpokog-unawa ka katondanan din to katikangan to katondanan to Amoy rin no ian Magboboot.
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin to, “Nigbogoy ni Moisis no og-ongkoran now ka asawa now su makogal su ulu now; kono kow ogkaanad. Di dongan no nighimu to Magboboot ka tibo, waro din nigbogoy to soini.
pantow
Nokani no waro a pad mataga ko nokoy ka Balaod to Magboboot, noiling to waro a pad makasalo. Di ko nataga a to Balaod din, nigtokod a to duon nanaan salo ku, woy nataga a no litos to oglogparan a to kamatayon no waro katamanan.
oglagdong ka mata
Umayam
Ko duon sundalu no ogpogos kaniu no og-alap to kandin no kalaglagan taman to songo kilumitru ro, pasubloi now to songo sagboka no kilumitru.
Ka dongan no mgo otow, oggasap to bulu no ogko-unawa to tarok no igsokod to baloybaloy oyow ogko-indanan ko hondo-i ka sinabong woy balokun woy ka gomawan din.
Nighoo ka kapitan ki Pablo no nigsasindog on si Pablo duon to hagoran woy nigkamoy rin oyow oghagtong on ka mgo otow to ogkakagi. Poghagtong dan on, nigkagian ni Pablo sikandan to kinagian dan no Hinibriu.
Ka otow no oggoram to bulò, ungud ogbulo-on ka og-okayan su ogdogos ka li-og din.
No, nan-uli sikandan ligkat to sabalanan no nignangonan dan ka sampulu woy sagboka no mgo hibatoon ni Hisus woy songo nignangonan dan ka tibo no mgo karumaan dan tongod to nabayaan dan.
oyow ogkaanad on sikandan to igdakoli to goinawa ran ka asawa ran, woy to mgo anak dan.
To marani ka Bitania to Hirusalim, mohon-ing no mgo Hudiu no taga Hirusalim no nighondio ki Marta woy si Maria. Ogtalapon dan ka goinawa to sika patalahari no darua to kamatayon to maama ran.
Di nigwaro-waro si Pedro no kagi rin, “Wara a mataga woy wara a makasabut to kalitukan to kagi nu.” Nò, nighondio to nganga no nig-ukalo ka manuk.
lugkò
batanbatan
Sikan ian to waro iglimanglimang to pog-iman-iman noy kaniu su nataga koy ko ogpakalagkos kow kanami to pog-aguanta to igkabaybayari noy, songo ogpakalagkos kow kanami to sikan no ogpakabulig to goinawa noy.
Duon pananglitan ku. Dio to dakol no baloy, duon mahal no kalaglagan no bulawan, woy ka nohimu to palata, woy songo duon ka baratu no nohimu no kayu woy ko basak. Ka mahal no kalaglagan, ogkoindanan to magaliug, di ka duma, oglitos no ogkapurut to agad nokoy.
bukbuk
sayo-sayò
Nig-abin ni Pablo ka pogko-uripon din diò ki Hisus su noimu sikandin no sugu-anon.
Di og-awoson now to oghogoton now on ian ka pogtuu now to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon, no ogsagbokoon now ro ka goinawa now dio ki Hisus. Ian su oyow kono ogkawoil ka pog-iman-iman now to tibo no nokani no ingkanangon kaniu no nigdinog now ka soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu. Sikan ian no nangnangonon ka naalap-alap on woy nanangnangonan on dio to agad hondoi no otawa kai to ampow to soini no kalibutan. No sikanak no si Pablo, nigsugu a to oyow ognangonnangon a to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon.
Doromdoma now ka batasan to mgo pinanganak ni Israil. Tibo sikandan, ogkoon to sikan no ayam no insabuk dan to tubaranan no igbogoy ran to Magboboot. No ian igmaganangon to songo ogpakalagkos sikandan to duma no og-ampu to Magboboot.
hagtong
Ka abug, obol no ligkat to tanò.
Ko du-on ka ogbinayu to homoy, moon-ing ka ogbosik no homoy to losong su ligkat to pogbagdak ta to homoy.
No agad hondoi a nignangonnangon woy ko nig–anad, ko dio to mgo baloy now woy ko dio to mohon–ing no mgo otow, nataga kow to waro iholos ku to agad nokoy no ogpakabulig kaniu.
Timoteo, unug ka to in-anad ku su tu-tuu ian ka kagi ku. Hirosoni nu ka pogtuu nu ki Hisu Kristu woy ka dakol no goinawa nu to mgo otow no nigligkat to nasagboka kinow on kandin.
No, nigparagas nighondio to limang to lanow no nigduung dio to lunsud to Hinisarit.
Ko kona a oghimu to igsugu to Amoy ku, kono kow ogtuu koddi.
Ka bongit, okang, kulagu, woy pulow, mausilom dò ogkagi. Ko og-ulingit ka ogkagi, nahan to mgo buyag no busow.
wadya
To nigkita to mgo Parisiu to nighimu ran, nigkagi sikandan ki Hisus to, “Pitawa nu ka mgo hibatoon nu. Ogpakasalo sikandan to Balaod ta to kono ki ogtalabau to Allow ta to Oghimoloy.”
Sikan ian to ogtalosonon ku sikaniu to oyow ogboli kow to bulawan no nool-ologan on dio to hapuy no warad on solug no maligsom. Ka sikan, ian ka malogot no pogtuu now woy ka igkaratui now. Woy kua now kai to kanak ka maputi no kinabo now oyow ogkaatangan on ka igkasipod now. Woy hondii kow ka ogpatambal kanak to mata now oyow ogpakakita kow on.
Nigsugu din ka mgo hibatoon din to, “Ko oghipanow kow, ka tukod now ro ka og-alapon now. Ko now alapa ka bohow now woy ko kabil now woy ko salapi now.
Nò, ogkokoon si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din to sikan no poglabung dan. Nò, nakasolod on si Satanas to goinawa ni Hudas no anak ni Simon Iskarioti to ogpanabod din si Hisus.
Ka igmalogot to otow, ogtuuan ta, di lagboy tad ogtuuan ko ka Magboboot on ka ogkagi, no ian din igpamalogot to Anak din ian si Hisus.
Ogsulatan ku sikoykow, Titu no ogkounawa ka to tu-tuu ka ian no anak ku to pogtuu tanow. No ogbuyu a to oyow ogkohoy-uan ka to Magboboot no Amoy tanow woy si Hisu Kristu no ian Talagpangabang kanta. Woy songo ogbuyu a ran to oyow ogbogayan ka to maawang no goinawa nu.
Pananglitan, ko ogtugunan ka dio to baloy to songo otow no waro pad nigtuu, litos ko og-amut ka ko ogkoiniatan nu. No koon ka ro duon to agad nokoy no igpakoon dan. Di kono ka og-inso ko ingkatubad dan pad to inotow-otow su oyow waro igkamasakit to goinawa nu.
Nò, sikan no ogpanabod, tahan no nignangon kandan ko nokoy ka indanan oyow ogtokoron dan si Hisus. Kagi rin, “Ka ogharokan ku, sikandin ian ka ogpamanghoon now. Dakopa now sikandin.”
No ko oglibong ka busow dio to sika otow,” kagi ni Hisus, “ogkitoon din to maroyow on ka pogdoromdom to sikan no otow no ogkounawa to baloy no maawang on woy natapid on.
Nighutuk nigkagi si Pilatu to mgo otow to, “Nokoy ka oghimuon ku to soin no lukos no pighingaranan now to Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu?”
Kara tuid oghondio si Husi darua to inoy ni Hisus to Hirusalim su og-amut to pagkoonan to mgo Hudiu no oghingaranan dan to Paligad.
ogbuyù
“Hoo man ian, Buyag,” kagi to sikan no boi, “di agad ka mgo asu dio to salad to lamisaan, ogkoonon dan ka ogkoulug no mgo timu to mgo bato.”
lotom
Sikan ian, impabantug to Magboboot si Hisus no nigbogayan din sikandin to dakol lagboy no ngaran no ogpakalabow to ngaran to agad hontow
bogat
Singut nu ka homoy
noy
Di nigkagian to Magboboot ka sikan no datu to, ‘Naangol ka. Kuntoon no marusilom oghawion ku ka kouyagan nu, no ka kalaglagan nu no impanagana nud, ogkoongkoran nud on no hontow naan on ka ogtalipun ka soini?’ kagi to Magboboot.”
Ogtago-urò to anak din ko ogtalabau ka inoy. Oggibo-on ta ka batò. Ogpasusuon ta.
Ka otow no ogpanong-ow to bakbak, ogpilakon din to bagoloy.
Ka otow no nigtobas on ka nigga-ani, ogbabandoy on to lawa to homoy ka oghilamonon on
No sikan ian ka nighimu ku dio to Hirusalim no mohon–ing ka impapirisu ku no mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus su duon katondanan ku no nigligkat dio to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to Dakol no Ampuanan noy. No ko duon otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no nighimatayan dan, songo nig–uyun a to igkamatoy ran,” kagi ni Pablo.
ti-ow
Ko pinabayo to mata nu no ogpakasalo ka no og-ongkoran nu ka pogtuu nu to Magboboot, lokata nu. Madmaroyow ko ogsolod ka to Pandatuan to Magboboot no sagboka naan do so mata nu to igdogpak ka rio to imperno no duon dod darua no mata nu.
Nokouma on woy si Pablo dio to lunsud to Dirbi woy nighondio pad to Listra. No dio to Listra, duon otow no nigtuu ki Hisus. Ka ngaran din, si Timoteo. Hudiu ka inoy rin no songo nigtuu ki Hisus. Ka amoy rin atag, Girigu.
Ka tatolu a nigbuyu dio to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta to oyow og-awoon din ka soini no oggoramon ku.
Ka bunhit, ogpo-onan to liwati
kayamoy
Pananglitan, agad ko ogpakakagi a to loinloin no mgo kinagian, ko kinagian to mgo otow woy ko kinagian to mgo diwata to Magboboot, di ko waro goinawa ku to mgo otow, ian ku ro ogkounawaan ka agung no ogbukbukon no ogmasamuk do, woy ko soob to kandiru no ogkatikon.
Pogkalugoy,” kagi to mgo Sadusiu, “songo namatoy on ka boi,” kagi.
Ka alongaping, ian ka ogbo-ot to og-alap to lawa to sikan no ngalap.
warò goinawa
dowan
Nò,’ kagi to goinawa to datu, ‘Soini ka oghimuon ku. Ogguguson ku pad ka mgo pinayag ku no oghimuon ku pad ka dakoldakol no dio ku isabuk ka ogkagaani ku woy ka mgo duma pad no kalaglagan ku, litos ko dio ku tibo igsabuk.’
ba-ad
Nò, nahan now buwa ko madmaroyow ka pogpitow to Magboboot to mgo Hudiu, to pogpitow rin to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. Kono man su ian ku innangon kaniu ganna to tibo no mgo otow agad Hudiu woy ko kono no Hudiu, ogkabootan sikandan duon to goinawa ran to oghimu to mgo maroot.
Sikan ian to pigdakop dan on si Pedro woy si Huan no impapirisu ran on tagood to ogkapawo su mahapun on man dakopa.
Di kuntoon, impohitaga on to Magboboot su impasulat din on to mgo talagnangon to kagi rin dongan, woy su sikandin no ian Magboboot no waro katamanan, nigsugu to oyow ognangonnangon on dio to agad hondoi no otow to oyow ogtuu on woy to oyow ogpaagad-agad poron ka tibo kandan.
Sikandin ka Magboboot to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu, woy sikandin dod ka Amoy tanow no mabogbog. Ogbuyu a kandin to oyow ligkat to Gimukud din, ogkabogayan kow to maroyow no pogsabut oyow lagboy igpohitaga rin kaniu ka goinawa to Magboboot.
Nataga a to mgo batasan now. Woy nataga a to sikan no pogpoomot now to oghimuon now kanak, woy ka pog-aguanta now to mgo igkohirapi now. Woy nataga a to kono kow ogbogoy no ogdumaruma kaniu ka oghimu to maroot. No tongod to sikan no mgo otow no ubaton no ognangon to mgo suguanon sikandan ni Hisus, nig-ol-ologan now sikandan woy nigbatukan now to kono man no suguanon din sikandan.
Di kagi ni Hisus, “Kono nud,” no niggongonan ni Hisus ka talinga dut otow no nigbawian din on.
No ian to oyow, tibo kaniu, ogkasagboka ro ka pogkasayo now to Magboboot no ian Magboboot woy Amoy to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu.
Di ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to Magboboot woy ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod, nigbantaan sikandan ko ogmonuon dan to oyow ogkaayunan dan to ogpohimatayan si Hisus di ogkahallok sikandan ko ogpangabang ka mgo otow kandin.
patapid to panabas
Kanak no si Pablo, nigsulat a to kanak lagboy no bolad to, “Kanak ka ogbayad.” Di nataga ka to duon igbalos nu poron kanak su ligkat to in-anad ku koykow, nigtuu kad on no nabogayan kad on to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
patag
Ka otow no ogkakulisan to ogdakopon sikandin, ogkarakop. No ka otow no ogbunu, songo ogkabunu dod sikandin.” Omunaan to sikanta no mgo sakup to Magboboot, og-awoson to og-aguantoon ta ka igkabaybayari ta woy ogpoomot kinow to pogtuu ta.
kolog
Sikan ian no ogkoiniat a lagboy no oghondio to kaniu to Ruma su oyow songo ogpakanangonnangon a kaniu to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon.
Agad duon sagboka no otow no bato-bato pad dio no ogduma ki Hisus no nig-uuson sikandin to manipis no tol-ob. Pogsundul ki Hisus, nigdakop dan poron sikandin
Wa do malugoy no nigkita ka songo lukos ki Pedro. Kagi rin, “Sikoykow, songo sagboka ka to mgo karumaan ni Hisus,” di nigtabak si Pedro to, “Usi, kona a ra.”
aguanta
su nokani, magaan on poron ogkamatoy su ligkat to pogpaagad-agad din to insugu ni Kristu kandin. Di agad ko ogkamatoy sikandin, nigbalagad din oyow ogkabuligan a rin su waro ogkohimu now su mariu kow kai to kanak.
Nig-inso ni Hisus kandin, “Ogtuu kad su nakakagi a to nigkita kud sikoykow dio to lobut to sikan no kayu no igira? Ogkitoon now pad ka dakoldakol no igkoin-inuan now.”
liu
salukamit
Kagi ni Hisus to mgo Parisiu, no ian duma ran ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod dan to, “Og-inso a kaniu ko nokoy no batasan ka ogkaayun to Balaod ta ko Allow ta to Oghimoloy? Nokoy ka oghimuon ta, ka maroyow woy ko maroot? Ogpangabangan ta buwa ka otow oyow ogkabuhi woy ko oghimatayan ta?” Sikan ka kagi ni Hisus.
Ogdurulugdulug so-i bogas to mundù su mabogas.
Ka tibo no mgo otow no nigpamminog ki Hisus, nabolongbolong to dakol ka ogkasabutan din woy maroyow ka mgo tabak din to mgo buyag.
Ko subla ka batò no ogmo-init, ogkomoron.
kogal
Ian su tibo kinow, ko Hudiu ki woy ko kono ki no Hudiu, ko uripon ki woy ko kono ki no uripon, nohimu kinow on no sagboka ro no lawa su nigbautismuan kinow to Gimukud to Magboboot woy su sikan dod no Gimukud din ka impasolod to goinawa ta to oyow ogkohimu kinow on no sagboka ro no lawa.
Woy kid ogkalipuas ko nigbalukas kid on. Ogligkat to imbalukas.
lantod
Ko sikoddi,” kagi rin, “kona a og-awos to ogsayoon a to mgo otow.
Mgo sulod ku no nigtuu, paragasa now ka pogparakdakoloy now to goinawa no ogkounawa to patalasulod kow on ian.
‘Ah,’ kagi to goinawa to sikan no sinaligan, ‘soini naan ka oghimuon ku oyow ko ogkaawo ka katondanan ku, mohon-ing ka mgo otow no ogbulig koddi no agad hondoi ad ogpakalopow kandan, litos.’
“Dio kow ogsolod to malig-ot no gumawan no ian ka dalan dio to Magboboot. Di maluag ka gumawan woy malomu lagboy ka dalan no pohondio to hapuy no waro katamanan. Mohon-ing ka mgo otow no ogbayo to soini no dalan.
dolog
puntuk
sogò
Sikan no allow no nighimu ni Hisus ka basak woy pigbawian din ka nabutud, sikan ka Allow to mgo Hudiu to Oghimoloy.
Kagi to mgo hibatoon din to, “Nò man, kuntoon nalituk on ka kagi nu su konad no mgo pananglitan.
Woy nakarani kid on to tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu on no tahan on no ingkasulat ka ngaran dan dio to langit. Woy nakarani ki rod to Magboboot no ian Talagboot to tibo no otow. Woy songo nakarani kid on to gimukud to mgo matuwarong no nammatoy no naayun on ian lagboy ka goinawa ran to Magboboot.
Omunaan ko igpangulibot to otow ka tubaranan to Dakol no Ampuanan to Magboboot, ka tubaranan woy ka igtubad, tibo ka inpangulibot din
ligsom
Ko maallow woy ko marusilom, ungod din oglougloug dio to mgo sabalanan woy dio to mgo malopot no bubungan no ungod ogpangiak woy ungod din ogpalii to batu no magalang ka lawa rin.
No unawa rod ian to tibo. Tibo no papitu no patalahari nig-asawa, tag sagboka, to sika boi woy tibo, namatoy no waro anak dan. No bali naan namatoy ka boi.
Dio to solod to baloy duon mohon-ing no mgo otow no ogmaminnuu no dio to taliwaro si Hisus. Kagi to duma ki Hisus, “Wow Buyag, dio to libuwasan ka inoy nu, mgo hari nu, mgo ataboy nu, Ogpohondion ka kun.”
tag-i
Pabu, gansa, patuk, itik, tibò du-on mgo pakpak dan
No ungod do duon ogtoktokon ni Pedro ka lokob. Pogpuwas dan, pigkita ran on to si Pedro nanaan ian. No nabolongbolong lagboy ka mgo otow.
kolong
Og-alamon dan ka pinnuuanan no noindanan to mgo dakol no mgo otow ko rio to anaranan to mgo og-ampu woy ko duon pogkoon, ogpinnuu ro to longod to igbuyag to pagkoonan.
Nò, duon do ian bunsuri ni Pilipi to pogpasabut din to kalitukan to sikan no pigbasa to taga Itiopia duon to Tahan no Kasulatan. No innangonnangon din ka soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus.
Pogkaponga, duon mabogbog no diwata to Magboboot no nighonat to dakol no galingan no batu no indogpak din dio to dagat. No kagi rin to, “Ogkounawa to soini ka pogkagulak to sikan no mabantug no lunsud to Babilunia. Konad on ogkohutuk no ogkitoon.
alimukow
Ka otow no og-anad, awoson no kono din ogdoromdoma no labow sikandin to talag-anad kandin. Ogkounawa ro to suguanon no kono no labow to igbuyag din.
Ka ogmo-ol-olinoy, ka og-asawa to marani rin dò.
pundu
Nò, nigdalapak ka mgo talagpaniid no oggawoy poron ki Hisus no kagi ran kandin to, “Maistru, nataga koy to matuwarong ka ogkagion nu woy ka ig-anad nu. Songo nataga koy to pinog-unawa nu ka mgo otow agad ko dakol ka katondanan dan no og-anad ka ro duon to pogboot to Magboboot dio to mgo otow.
salapid
lonsì
Songo wa kow buwa makabasa to kagi to Magboboot no ingkasulat ni Moisis dongan no ka mgo talagpanubad to Magboboot dio to Dakol no Ampuanan og-awos to ogtalabau sikandan to Allow to Poghimoloy. Di waro salo dan dio to Magboboot.
dangob
Ogkakadkad ka biaa ko ogpakasanggat ko warò nabuku to poghimu.
sabal
Moon-ing ka mgo otow no nigbabahag to sikan no timpu dongan.
Sikan ian no ogkalimudlimud on sikandan woy ka mgo sundalu ran dio to tano no ogkohingaranan to kinagian to Hinibriu to Armagidun “Nò,” kagi ni Hisus to, “Pamminog kow to soini. Ko oglibong a to tano, oghondiaan ku sikaniu no ogtokawon ku sikaniu no ian ogkounawaan ka poglopow to ogpanakow. Maroyow to sikan no otow no ogngilam no waro nigluung woy kono ogkokoirogo su oyow kono kow ogkasipod to ogkatokawan to nalobasan kow on.”
Sikan ian ka lagboy ku ogkoiniatan no igpouli ku sikandin dio to kaniu oyow ogkarago kow to pogkita now kandin woy to oyow kono ad on ogkasasow kaniu.
Ko sikoddi, ogpundukon ku ka mgo otow no matuwarong so goinawa ran dio to Magboboot kai to kawanan ku, woy ka mgo dangob kai to gibang ku.
pinì
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, ko ogpokouma ad dio to kaniu, nokoy ka pulus now ko ogkagian ku sikaniu to sikan no loinloin no mgo kinagian no kono now ogkasabutan? Woy duon pulus now ko duon igkanangon ku kaniu to impasabut to Magboboot kanak, woy ko duon katagaanan no igpohitaga rin kaniu, woy ko ogpakanangon a to kagi rin no insabuk din to goinawa ku, woy ko duon igpaanad din kaniu.
“Indani now ka soini no kagion ku kaniu, su koddi no ian Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan, ogdakopon ad no ighatod a dio to mgo otow no ian ogboboot koddi.”
Sikan ian to kai a to pirisuan no noiling ad on to makasasalo no nohikotan to karina. Dokad di to waro ogpakaatang to kinagian to Magboboot.
pakoddol
hilabi
Agad sikandan no ogpaagad-agad to Balaod to ogtulion ka mgo lukos, di waro dan dod makatuman to tibo to sikan no Balaod ni Moisis. Di og-ayaton kow ran porom oyow ogkasayo sikandan to nigsakup kow on nikandan to ig-anad dan.
higtok
Nigsingut ni Pasita si Tumbasoy su konogkasipod.
pamula
Si Pilatu, ian ogkoiniatan din to ogkarago ka mgo otow no impalibuwas din si Barabas. Nigpalamposan ni Pilatu si Hisus woy impahatod din to mgo taga Ruma no sundalu oyow oglansangan dan sikandin dio to ampow to krus oyow ogkamatoy.
Ka sikan dod no allow, duon darua no tahan no karumaan ni Hisus no nighipanow no oghondio to lunsud to Imaus, no ka kariui to Imaus ligkat to lunsud to Hirusalim, sampulu woy sagboka no kilumitru.
po-pò
Kagi to mgo tagtuun to boi kuwo to mgo pogbuyagon to, “Hudiu ka soini no mgo otow no ogsamukon dan ka soini no lunsud ta,” kagi.
Ko ogbulawan, maroyow ka layag din. Malangan ka bulaw din.
Tungawan ka miow.
Ka bakosan, nigkulubung ka nigbulukù ka niggopan to dalan to babuy.
Nighipanow on si Hisus no nighondio to lunsud to Kapirnaum. To nigsolod to sika no lunsud, nakatagbu to taga Ruma no kapitan to songo gatus no mgo sundalu no nigpabulig sikandin ki Hisus. Kagi rin, “Buyag, dio to baloy ku, nigdaralu ka suguanon ku. Noumil on sikandin woy nabaybayaran lagboy sikandin.”
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Sikaniu, pigpasabut kow to Magboboot kow to inholos din no nangnangonon tongod to Pogsugu to Magboboot. Di ogkagian ku ka mgo otow no waro nigpasakup pinabayo to mgo pananglitan do
Kagi ni Hisus, “Kono ogkoimu to mgo otow, di ka Magboboot do atag ogpokohimu to agad nokoy.”
bus-ug
Soini buwa ka tuud to Magboboot to nalonusan ka pad ni Unisimu to malopot do su oyow, ko og-uli on koykow, diad on og-ugpo koykow taman to taman.
kabuon
Tongod to batasan ta no Hudiu to ogpatuli no igmaganangon to nigpasakup kinow on to Magboboot, duon ian pulus ko ogpaagad-agad kinow to sikan no dongan no Balaod din. Di ko kono ta ogpaagad-agaran ka sikan no Balaod din, waro pulus ka pogpatuli ta su ogkounawa kinow ro to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no waro nigpatuli no tahan no waro mataga to Magboboot.
putì
Nigsoom si Sintinalis lagboy
Ungod ki og-ampu to Magboboot no ogpabulig ki to Gimukud din ko nokoy ka litos no igbuyu ta kandin. Sikan ian, og-ayad-ayad ki woy ogpoomotan ta ka pog-ampu ta to oyow, ka tibo no mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisu Kristu, ogkabuligan to Magboboot.
Inlogsad on to soi darua no lukos ka lawa ni Hisus. Nigbukusan dan ka lawa rin to tol-ob no litos no igbukus to namatoy no duon isabuk ka sikan no mgo mohomut to tol-ob. Nighimu ran ka soini no batasan to mgo Hudiu dio to lawa to mgo namatoy woy ran isabal.
Di nigtabak ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din to, “Kaniu ka ogpakoon to soini no mgo otow.” Kagi to mgo hibatoon din to, “Ogmonuon noy naan to duon do lalimma no malison no paan ta woy darua ro no malison no ngalap to woig kai to kanami? Og-inso koy koykow ko ogpohipanawon koy nu oyow ogbolion noy ka litos to pogkoon to soini no mohon-ing no mgo otow?”
Di si Kristu atag, ian ka Anak to Magboboot no ian tagtuun to baloy. No masalig si Hisus to og-alap to mgo otow no impasakup to Magboboot. No sikanta ka nohimu on no baloy rin, ko kono tad oglokaan ka pogsalig ta woy ka igkarago ta to sikan no og-im-imanan ta kandin.
Ko nigkita ran si Hisus, nigkagian dan sikandin to “Ogpamitow ka tibo no mgo otow koykow.”
Sikanak no si Pablo ka ogsulat kaniu no mgo nigtuu ki Hisus no dio og-ugpo to ugpaan to Galasia. Sikanak woy ka mgo sulod ta to pogtuu no kai to kanak, ogpangumustoon noy sikaniu. Pig-abin ad on to oyow ogkohimu ad on no suguanon ni Hisu Kristu woy ka Magboboot no ian Amoy ta. Sikandin ka nig-uyag ki Hisus ligkat to kamatayon din. No ka sikan no pog-abin din, nigligkat dod kandin. Waro nigligkat to pogboot to mgo otow.
tungkuk
No pogbus-ug din to woig, no nasubid ka baloy to lapinid no na-antog to woig no pigsogod sikandin.
A las nuibi to masolom ko inlansang dan si Hisus dio to krus woy piglindog dan ka krus.
Si Isikias amoy ni Manasis. Si Manasis amoy ni Amon. Si Amon amoy ni Hosias.
Ian su tibo no otow no indakoli to goinawa to Magboboot, ogkoogotan din woy ogsaparan din ka sikan no mgo otow no oghingaranan din no anak din.”
Nò, ka dakol no ayam no oghingaranan to kamil, mamalomu pad to ogpasorop to lobut to dagom to ogpasakup ka datu to Pogsugu to Magboboot.”
Duon dod kagi ni Hisus to mgo hibatoon din to, “Sikan ka innangon ku kaniu su oyow kono kow og-ituos to pogtuu now.
Ogmagasò ka agoloy. Ogmalintok ka pusù.
To nigdinog si Gobirnador Hirodis to mgo hinimuan ni Hisus, nasasow lagboy sikandin su duon mgo otow no nignangon to nootawan si Huan no Talagbautismu ligkat to kamatayon din.
bagò
No sikanta no pinanganak ni Adan, tano dod ka inhimu to lawa ta su ian dod ka inhimu to lawa ni Adan. No sikanta no nigpasakup ki Hisus no nigligkat to langit, songo ogkounawa rod ka lawa ta to kandin no lawa ko dio kid on to langit uromo.
Di ka bayokbok diò to dagat, ogpangini-kinì.
saliu
kotu-kotù
Ka sunud no allow, nigkita ni Huan si Hisus no dio to dalan no oghondio to kandin. Kagi rin to mgo otow, “Pitow kow dio. Soinid on ka nati to karniru to Magboboot su kandin ka ogpakimatoy oyow ogkaawo ka salo to tibo no mgo otow kai to kalibutan.
sopa
boros
suguy
Mgo sulod, duon igkabolongbolong ku kaniu su wa do malugoy no nig-iniugan now kun ka Magboboot di sikandin ka nig-abin kaniu no nigligkat to nohoy-uan kow on ni Kristu. No nigbunsud kow kun no ogtuu to loin no maroyow kun no nangnangonon.
basikal
batuk
sulu
Nigtabak ni Hisus kandan to, “Wow mgo otow no nouyag pad kuntoon, kaniu no waro pogtuu to Magboboot, hondoi katamanan to pogduma ku kaniu? Kon-u a ogkaponga ka pog-aguanta ku kaniu? Alapa now ka bato kai to koddi.”
Sikan ian mgo sulod, ogbuyu a kaniu, to oyow ogpamminog kow to mgo otow no ogkounawa ki Istipanas woy ka tibo no talagbulig kandin.
Ka bonsaran, ian ka diralom to daligdigan no ka katamanan to nakasandig.
Duon dangob no pananglitan ni Hisus. Kagi, “Hontow buwa ka otow no igtupak din ka iam no manggad no wa pad malaboi to tahan no kinabo din? Ko oghimuon din soini, ogkonsong ka iam no tupak no ogmaluag ka nagisi to tahan no kinabo.”
oyow kono ogkawoil ka pogtuu now ki Hisus agad duon dod ka soini no mgo igkabaybayari now. Nataga kow lagboy to nigboot to Magboboot to duon ogkaaguanta ta no igkabaybayari.
pamunsonga
Nataga kow to, ka sikan no an-anayan no innangonnangon ku kaniu tongod ki Hisus no dio a pad to kaniu, ian su nigdaralu ad dio no waro a mokohipanow.
karas
tigus
Nò, su nalagkos kinow on to pogkamatoy ni Hisu Kristu, malogot ian no songo ogkouyag kinow on no ogkounawa to ogpakalagkos kinow rod to kandin no pogkouyag ligkat to kamatayon din.
Sikan ian, kono no litos ko ogparakoldakol ki su ka pogkaawo to mgo salo ta, kono ogligkat to pogtuman ta to Balaod no ingkasulat ni Moisis, di ogligkat atag to nigtuu kinow on ki Hisus,
Ka taan no goinawa now, konò now igtupak to iam no goinawa now
Manikìn
tagpì
Sagboka ku
Mgo sulod, ampui koy ro.
Panakmag ka bu-aya.
“Ka sikan no otow no ogkoiniat to ogsayo, litos ko ian din do ogsayoon ka pighimu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.”
Mapawo, ka mgo sundalu no nighipanow ro, nan–uli on dio to kampu to mgo sundalu. No ian do nigparagas ka mgo sundalu no nanguddo no oghatod ki Pablo dio to Sisaria.
Nò, to nigpinpinnuu si Hisus dio to bubungan to Olibu, ka mgo hibatoon din no warad loin duma ran, nigdalapak ki Hisus no kagi ran to, “Nangoni koy bag ko kon-u ogkohimu soini? Woy songo nangoni koy ko nokoy ka mgo indanan oyow ogkatagaan noy no oglibong kad on woy to soini on ka mohuri no allow?”
ogò
dakol
tiktik
Nigtuu ki Hisus ka mohon-ing no mgo taga Samaria ligkat to sikan no lunsud su ka innangon to sikan no boi to, “Innangon din koddi ka tibo no nighimu kud.”
Agad Hudiu woy ka kono no Hudiu, nigbohog ku sikandan to og–awoson to ogsonditan woy og–ongkoran dan on ka mgo maroot no oghimuon dan woy to oghalinon dan on ka goinawa ran dio to Magboboot no ogtuu on ki Hisu Kristu no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
Ogpatokawan to og-alamaraan oyow ogko-ubus dan oghimatoy
lugsù
Ka batò no warò pad matulì no du-on batad to lasù din, maga-an dò ogkalasat.
“Ko oglangkad kow ogkoon oyow to og-ampu kow dio to Magboboot, kono now igpoitaga to mgo otow pinabayo to langlanguwan now. Sikan ka oghimuon to mgo ogpatuutuu ka pogtuu ran. Oghihipanow sikandan no wa dan nigpandop-ug, woy waro dan nigpanugkad su maroyow ran ko ogkatagaan to mgo otow to oglangkad ogkoon su og-ampu. Ognangonan ku sikaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “to duon on pogsayo kandan to mgo otow, sikan do ian ka igsayo kandan.
likag
Ka balatik, ka lit-ag woy balod, tibò du-on sa-id no ian ogpakabokat to sanggatan.
uyag
antuk
Ko ogdolmol ki to woig no mating-ow, du-on alung ta diò to diralom.
Konò a ogpakalogon to sikan no mabogat no problima.
Ogkatuman ka sikan ko allow to poglibong ni Hisus. No ian to oyow ogkasayo sikandin to mgo sakup din. Sikan ian no ogkabantug sikandin to tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu kandin lagkos to sikaniu su nigtuu kow to inmalogot noy kaniu tongod ki Hisus.
kiapù
Ko batò no nakarogpak, nakagud ka pa-a rin to batu no napalisan on.
Ay-ayaran din ka batasan din to mgo otow no malotoy woy ogkohoy-uan din ka mgo otow no mohirapan no waro ogbulig kandan. Kono sikandin oghagtong no ogbulig taman to ogpandoog din to matuwarong no mgo tuud ku,
batu
gopang
onong
Pogkaponga to sikan, duon nigdinog ku no ogkoiling to kagulub to mohon-ing no mgo otow no dio to langit. No kagi ran to, “Ogsayoon tanow ka Magboboot. Sikandin ka nigpangabang to mgo salo to mgo otow. Mabantug woy mabogbog sikandin.
No sikanta no nigtuu no duon dod to ampow to soi tano woy ka mgo nigtuu no nouyag on, ogkabatun kinow on no ogpokog-amut-amut kinow on dio longod to mgo gapun ka ogpakatagbu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. No dio kinow og-ugpo kandin to waro ogkataman.
Hontow
Nataga a to soini tongod to duon koddi no mgo igbuyag no ogtumanon ku ka igsugu dan. Songo unawa ro koddi su songo duon katondanan ku to mgo sundalu ku. Ogsuguon ku ka sagboka to, ‘Hondio ka,’ nò, oghondio sikandin; ogsuguon ku ka duma to ‘Hondini ka,’ nò, oghondini sikandin. Woy ognangonan ku ka suguonon ku to, ‘Himua nu soini,’ nò, oghimuon din on.”
Songo monu
No duon balubato no nigpinpinnuu dio to bintana. Si Eutiku ka ngaran din. No pogkagi pad ni Pablo, ogdungdunggayon no nokohirogo on. Nakolid no noulug on dio to tano ligkat to igkatolu no handana. Poghonat dan to lawa rin no namatoy on.
ukalò
Ay-ayaman ku so-i.
Ogbuyu a kaniu, mgo sulod, to oyow og-aguantoon now ro to ogsagman to soini no ig-udling ku kaniu to soini no sulat ku no malopot do.
dallug
No ko ogbogayan ki to katondanan to og-anad, og-awoson to ian ta ignangonnangon ka kinagian to Magboboot. No ko ogbogayan ki to katouanan ta to ogbulig to duma ta, og-awoson to ka igbulig ta, ogligkat to dayagang no igbogoy to Magboboot kanta. Ian su og-awoson to ligkat to tibo no igpohimu ni Hisu Kristu, ogkasayo on ka Magboboot. No sikandin ka litos no ogsayoon woy sikandin dod ka mabogbog to waro katamanan.
Songo nigtabak ka lukos no kagi rin to, “Nigpaagad-agad a to tibo soini no mgo sugu. Nokoy pad ka og-awoson no oghimuon ku?”
To nanhipanow on ka mgo mamimituon no mgo otow, to nohirogo si Husi, natagoinop din ka diwata no kagi to diwata to, “Onow ka Husi, dumaa nu ka bato woy ka inoy rin woy salsalia kow dio to ugpaan to Ehipto. Ugpo kow dio taman to ognangonan ku sikaniu to og-awo kow dio su ogpamanghoon ni Hirodis ka bato su ogkoiniatan din no ogpohimatayan sikandin.”
Ka otow no ogtinawo to talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot su talagnangon sikandin, sikan no otow no ogtinawo, ogbogayan to Magboboot ka igsayo unawa to igbogoy rin to talagnangon din ko mohuri no allow. Woy ka otow no ogtinawo to songo otow no ogpaagad-agad to Magboboot su ka sika pogpaagad-agad din, ogbogayan to Magboboot ka songo igsayo unawa to igbogoy rin dut otow no ogpaagad-agad kandin.
Ligkat to sikan no pinnuuanan to Lagboy no Igbuyag, ogkikilat woy oglulugung to maagbot. No to tangkaan to sikan no pinnuuanan, duon papitu no mgo ilawan no naparokotan on. Ka sikan, ian ka papitu no igpohitaga to kabogbogan to Gimukud to Magboboot.
No pigsayo on to sikan no taga Hudia ka Magboboot su songo nigtuu ad on ki Hisus.
Ogkaawo on ka soini no kalibutan woy songo ogkaawo dod ka mgo maroot no ogkoiniatan to mgo otow, di ka otow no ogtuman to ogkoiniatan to Magboboot, duon kouyagan din waro katamanan.
Inogo on no duon naragdag no nigligkat to mata ni Saulo no ogkoiling to mgo ongil. No nakagimulat on ka mata rin. Pogkaponga, nigsasindog woy nigpabautismu on.
Ko ogbubula ki, og-ambotut ki ka ogtugdò ki to bula.
bolad
No igkaruwa, ka tuud to pighimu to Magboboot to lukos, kono to oyow duon duma to boi, di nighimu rin ka boi oyow duon duma to lukos.
bano-ow
Ka otow no gatawan, ogkito-on ka ugat to bolad din su oggatow on. Ogkotul.
Woy ogbuyu koy to oyow ogparakolon to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta ka goinawa now to mgo duma now woy ka goinawa now to tibo no mgo otow oyow ka pogparakoloy to goinawa now kandan, ogpokog-unawa ro karakol to kanami no goinawa kaniu.
Ko nigbinulan si Elena dio to Davao, pigsugu sikandin to ogpabus-ugan to woig ka bulak.
Pigtabak ni Hisus pinabayo to pananglitan. Kagi rin, “Duon otow no nighipanow no ogtupang ligkat to lunsud to Hirusalim no oghondio to lunsud to Hiriku. No nakabayo to mgo mabulut no mgo takawon no pig-agow ran on ka kalaglagan din, tibo no mgo kinabo din woy nigbarasan dan pad no nig-ongkoran dan woy no magaan on porom ogkamatoy.”
Kono tad ogkalingawan to ian to og-aguantoon pad to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta ka mgo otow su oyow duon ogliwak to ogkapangabangan sikandan to logpad to Magboboot. Sikan dod ka ingkasulat ni Pablo kaniu. No sikandin, ka indakoli ta no patalasulod to pogtuu ta. No ian to nakasulat sikandin su duon katouanan din no nigligkat to impohitaga to Magboboot kandin.
Og-ulì kid on diò to Maambago oyow na-an ogkamatoy a di diò ad to baloy ta.
kutu to kalabow
Di nigwaro-waro si Pedro to kagi rin to, “Igi, waro a mogtilala kandin.”
golut
To nataga on si Pilatu to taga Galilia ian si Hisus, nakaroromdom si Pilatu to sakup naan sikandin ni Hirodis no ian igbuyag to mgo taga Galilia. Sikan ian no impahatod din pad si Hisus dio ki Hirodis su songo duon sikandin dio to Hirusalim.
Hoo su taman kuntoon, ko ogbasoon ka Balaod no ingkasulat ni Moisis, ogkaatangan dod ka mgo pogdoromdom dan.
Pogpinnuu ni Hisus nigparani rin ka sikan sampulu woy darua no hibatoon din no kagi rin kandan, “Ko duon otow no ogkoiniat to kandin ka ogkohimu no dakoldakol, og-awoson to ogpohun-oon to sikan no otow ka mgo duma rin no sikandin ka mohuri; kandin ka ogbulig to tibo.”
Dakol ka goinawa rin kanta no mgo taga Hudia woy sikandin ka nigbayad to ogpohimu to kanami no anaranan to mgo og-ampu,” kagi to mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu.
kusubkusub
Bunu-on ki ko kò ki ogkatapid to limukon.
Kono kow ogkasasow woy dokow ogkahallok su ko oghipanow ad on dio to Amoy ku, iggalat ku ka kalinow dio to goinawa now. Kono no ogkounawa to kalinow to mgo kootawan kai to soin no kalibutan; ogligkat koddi ka iggalat ku kaniu no kalinow.”
Ungod noy ogsayoon ka Magboboot tongod kaniu tibo woy ungod noy oghingarani sikaniu
Ogpakamalogot a to ogpoomoton dan to ogtuman to tinuuan dan no nahan dan no igkarago to Magboboot, di waro dan matagoi ka dalan no tu-tuu no oglitos no igkarago din.
tagbanua
Di songo nataga ka goinawa ta to sikan no malayat no bulbul to boi, ian ka igmaroyow to lawa ran su imbogoy to Magboboot to boi ka malayat no bulbul dan no igtorong to ulu ran.
No waro man moghagtong ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus to ognangonnangon, su allow–allow, ko dio to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu woy ko dio to mgo baloy, ungod ognangonnangon woy ogpan–anad to mgo otow to si Hisus, ian ka Kristu, no ian Im–imanan to mgo Koot–otawan.
Di nataga koy to mohon–ing ka mgo otow dio to agad hondoi no ogdoot to tinuuan to sikan no sampangan to mgo otow no nig–amutan nud. Sikan ian to ogkoiniatan noy to ogpamminog ko nokoy ka koykow no mgo ogkaroromdom.” kagi to mgo Hudiu.
Agad nokoy no inkagi now ko marusilom, uromo ogdinogon on dio to maawang. Agad nokoy no innaasnaas now dio to sinabong no nalokoban, igkababansagon ka sikan no kagi dio to libuwasan no ogdinog ka mohon-ing no mgo otow.”
Si Asa amoy ni Hosapat. Si Hosapat amoy ni Horam. Si Horam amoy ni Usias.
Di ian do ogpakasolod to sikan no igkarangob no sinabong, ka Labow to mgo Talagpanubad. No kasagboka ro ka pogsolod din to songo tuid. Di woy ro ogpakasolod sikandin ko duon langosa to ayam no og-alapon din no igbogoy woy igpanlimpas din dio to Magboboot no litos to kandin no salo woy ka salo to mgo duma rin no Hudiu.
Nò, tagood to nigtagaran ni Pablo si Timoteo woy si Silas dio to Atinas, nigpamitowpitow rin to sikan no lunsud. Di naaras–aras ka goinawa rin su agad hondoi ogdolog, nigkita to mohon–ing lagboy ka mgo inotow-otow no og–ampuan to mgo taga Atinas.
Ko moon-ing ka na-asna-as woy og-o-oguk no oggusi-on tad ka galung ta no pula no ogkito-on tad ka moon-ing no alibutod no og-aliboodbood on.
Lubunan ka alad.
to-ul
linanoy
Ko du-on tambal no ma-alas no igdamulas ta to lawa ta,  ogmaporos ka laplap ta.
Si Hunas dongan, nokougpo dio to gotok to dakol no ngalap to dagat to tatolu no allow woy tatolu no marusilom. Ogkounawa ka ogkabayaan ku, koddi no Kakoy to koot-otawan kai to tano, iglobong a rio to tano to tatolu no allow woy tatolu no marusilom.
punggù
Tongod to goinawa now to mgo duma now no ogtuu ki Hisus, waro now awosa to duon igsulat ku kaniu su ka Magboboot ka nig-anad kaniu to oyow ogdakolon now ka goinawa now to duma now.
su woy ad oghutuk no ogkoon to soini no pagkoonan ta ko ogkatuman on uromo ka tibo no kalitukan to soini no pagkoonan no ogkatuman on ka Pandatuan to Magboboot.”
Nigparagas nigkagi to, “Ogkoumaan kow, nò, noumaan kow on to allow no ogpokogsuwoysuwoy kow no og-uli dio to kaniu no mgo baloy. Nò, sagboka ku naan do. Dokad di, kona a no sagboka ro su ka Amoy ku ka duma ku.”
Ko ogpinnu ka batò, songo og-ilud on ko kò pad ogsasindog.
Ungud ka u-ubat kanami.
lii
Di ka lawa ta, waro noiling to sikan su mohon-ing man ka igsumpul din di sagboka ro ian no lawa.
Duon sulat ku no impaalap ku dio to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to kaniu. Di waro mogsagman si Diotripis su kono ogpaagad-agad to katondanan ku. Ian su ogkoiniatan din ko sikandin doka ogpakaalap to mgo otow.
Nò ogkounawa rod ki Abraham su duon insabut to Magboboot kandin woy songo innangon din dod to kapunganan ni Abraham no sagboka no waro pad mootow. No ka ingkasulat to sikan, waro nigkagi to, “ka mgo pinanganak nu no ogkalituk poron to mohon-ing no pinanganak ni Abraham. Sikan ian to ogkataga ki to si Kristu do ka igkatuon to sikan no innangon dongan to Magboboot ki Abraham.
Ian su, to pogsulat ku kaniu, lagboy a nasasow woy nigmasakit so goinawa ku no nakasinsinogow ad. Di ka tuud ku to ogsulat kaniu, kono to oyow ogmasakit ka goinawa now, di oyow ogkataga kow to dakol lagboy ka goinawa ku kaniu.
halisok
Ian su og-awoson to kono tad ogbogayan si Satanas to igliwak din to ogpasalo kanta.
Nigtabak ka igbuyag dan no kagi din to, ‘Ka songo usig ka nighimu sikan.’ Nig-insaan dan ka igbuyag dan no kagi ran to, ‘Ogbagnuson noy sikan no mgo hilamunon?’
tinurù
Nò mgo sulod, kono kow og-iling to mgo bato no maagkap so goinawa ran to ogboboot. Di tongod to mgo maroot no batasan, iling kow ro to mgo bato pad no kono pad amana ogpakadoromdom to maroot. Di tongod to pogboot now, mabogata now ka goinawa now.
Ka mgo talagpanubad no pinanganak ni Libi no ogpakapurut to sikan no igkasampulu no baad to pog-ugpo to mgo otow, otow rod sikandan no songo ogkamatoy. Di si Milkisidik atag no nabogayan ni Abraham to kandin no igkasampulu, ogkoiling to duon dod no waro namatoy su sikan ka ingkasulat dongan tongod kandin.
Woy duon ingkasulat no ngaran din dio to kinabo din woy dio to longod to bubun din. No kagi to sulat to, “Datu no ogpakalabow to tibo no mgo datu woy Igbuyag no ogpakalabow to tibo no mgo igbuyag.”
maroyow ka goinawa
No kagi ni Pedro to, “Tibo no mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot ligkat dongan ki Samuel lagkos to mgo sunud no mgo talagnangon to kagi rin, nakanangon to soini no oghimuon to Magboboot kai to kanta kuntoon. Ian su sikanta ka mgo pinanganak to sikan no mgo talagnangon to kagi rin, songo ogpakalagkos kid on to sikan no insabut to Magboboot kandan dongan no nigkagi ka Magboboot ki Abraham dongan to, “Duon uromo pinanganak nu no ogbogoy to karoyawan dio to tibo no kapunganan to soini no tano.” Ian ka kagi to sulat.
Di nigtabak si Abraham to, ‘Apu, doromdoma nu ko manokal ka pad, waro kulang to pog-ugpo nu su maroyow no kalaglagan nu di si Lasaru atag, noumaan to maroot no pog-ugpo din di kai kuntoon, si Lasaru maroyow ka pog-ugpo di sikoykow kuntoon, ogkabaybayaran ka.
wà
Omunaan, kono kow ogkasasow ko hondoi kow ogpakapamangho to koonon now woy inumon now woy hondoi now kitaa ka litos no igkinaboon now.
labung
dungkò
Ligkat to pogtuu ni Husi to Magboboot, ko magaan on ogkamatoy, nigpanuguntugun to duon dod allow no ka tibo no mgo pinanganak ni Israil, ogkaawo on to ugpaan to Ehipto. Songo nignangonan din sikandan ko ogmonuon dan ka bokog din ko oghipanow on sikandan.
babow
Ig-agpas nu ighatod. Igpamaga-an ta igpahatod.
sakopu
Konad no litos no oghingaranan a nu to anak nu. Balagad ko og-ang-anggaan a nud on no og-amut ad to mgo suguonon nu.’ ” Sikan ka kagi to goinawa rin.
No og-awoson ta to kono ogpoog-ogotoy ka mgo sakup to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, di ogkohoy-uan dan ka tibo no mgo otow. Woy og-awoson to maroyow ka batasan dan to pog-anad dan woy to oyow ogmalayaton dan ka poggogoinawa ran to mgo otow.
Kò ki ogkatimalud to mangayow.
No ligkat to sikan, impohitaga to Gimukud to Magboboot kanta, to tagood to waro pad napolod ka tahan no ampuanan, kono pad ogpakasolod ka duma no mgo otow dio to sikan no Kinaroyawan no Sinabong no dio lagboy to tangkaan din.
Taman to kuntoon,” kagi ni Hisus, “waro now pad nig-inso ka agad nokoy dio to Magboboot pinabayo to ngaran ku. Pamuyu kow oyow ogbogayan kow oyow ogkohimu no duon malogot no igkarago now.”
Nò, nakarapig on ka sikan no tahan no Balaod ni Moisis su waro pulus su kono ogpakabulig to mgo otow.
Pogoson ki to ogbuyù.
Ka koiniatan ta no batasan, sikan dod ian ka batasan no litos no oghimuon ta to songo otow woy to duma ta.”
Malogot ian ka ignangon ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “to sikan no suguanon, no ogkasaligan on to igbuyag din ogbogayan sikandin to pogboot to tibo no karatuan din.
Ian su to dio a pad to kaniu, duon impapitow to Magboboot kaniu to mgo kabolongbolonganan woy ka immalogot to kinagian din woy ka duma no mgo mabogbog no mgo hinimuan din. Woy songo duon mgo igkabaybayari no nig-aguanta ku. No ligkat to sikan, ogpakatokod kow to tu-tuu ian to suguanon a ni Hisu Kristu.
Ko ogkapilak to mangayow, og-agbas ka kommag
abod
Manag-ulì to mundù.
Kagi to sagboka no talag-anad to Balaod dan ki Hisus to, “Maistru, ka nigkagi nu to mgo Parisiu, songo igsawoy nu kanami no mgo talag-anad to Balaod.”
Nakasiniku a to bangkù.
ubus
mangguapu
Ko ogpakangarog ka boi to ogtutungon, ogka-awò ka goinawa rin to ko-iniat din to sikan no lukos.
Nò, mgo sulod, ko ogkaroromdom din ka pogpaagad-agad now to innangon noy kaniu woy ka maroyow no pogsagman now kandin to pogdatong din woy ka dakol no pogtahud now kandin, ogkatimulan ka igdakoli rin sikaniu to goinawa.
No su nohoy-uan ki to Magboboot, ogpakasabut ki ko kai ki pad to soini no kalibutan og-awoson no og-ongkoran tad on ka tibo no batasan ta no kono oglitos kandin woy ka mgo koiniatan to soini no lawa ta no kono no litos. Di atag og-awoson to oyow ogmaroyawon ta ka goinawa ta no oghimu ki to maroyow ro woy ka ogkoiniatan to Magboboot.
Nanparagas nan-untud on si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din to dakol no balutu.
dalu
limukon
salang
Ko og-ampu kow, ko kow oggamit to kagi no waro pulus, su sikan ian ka batasan to mgo otow no nigtuu to mgo inotow-otow su nahan dan no ogdinogon sikandan ko ogmalayaton dan ka pog-ampu dan.
usig
Nighipanow on si Hisus ligkat to sikan no baloy to Parisiu. Di ka mgo Parisiu woy mgo talag-anad to Balaod to mgo Hudiu, nigsawoy ran si Hisus. Sikan ka pogbunsud dan to oglibonglibong og-inso ki Hisus to agad nokoy ka duon to goinawa ran su ogtalapon dan poron si Hisus oyow ogpakasuwoy poron ka igtabak kandan no oghimuon poron no igbayung dan kandin.
Sikan otow no ogtuu to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon woy ogkabautismuan sikandin, ogkouyag no waro katamanan dio to Magboboot. Di sikan no otow no kono ogtuu, oglogparan sikandin to mohuri no allow.
Ko nigtuu ki Hisus ka tagtuun kandan, og-awoson to kono dan ogmalintokon ka pogtahud dan to tagtuun kandan ko ligkat to nataga to sikan, di og-awoson no ogdakolon dan atag ka talabau ran to tagtuun kandan su ka songo nigtuu ka ogbuligan dan no dakol so goinawa to Magboboot kandan. Ka soini no ignangon ku koykow, songo ig-anad nu woy igpasabut nu to mgo otow no nigtuu.
usung
diù
dungdung
Hondoi ka malomu no kagi ku to soin no nigkolog so lawa rin, ko ignangon ku to, ‘Napasaylu on ka mgo salo nu,’ woy ko ogsugu a to, ‘Onow kad on; honata nu ka hibatanan nu no hipanow kad on?’
langkotow
Ko nigkagi si Dabid, kono no ka kandin lagboy no ka lawa ka ingkatuon din to sikan no ingkasulat din su waro nabatun si Dabid dio to Langit. Di nigsulat si Dabid to, ‘Kagi to Magboboot kuwo to Igbuyag ku to, Kai ka pa to kawanan ku ogpinpinnuu
lubò
Duon allow no nigpasiporan kow woy nigbaybayaran kow to tangkaan to mgo otow. Woy duon mgo allow no nigbulig kow rod to duma now no nigbaybayaran.
Ian ka ogkagion ku,” kagi ni Hisus, “su agad hontow no ogkannugunan din ka soini no kouyagan din kai to tano, warad nasi kandin to mohuri no allow. Di ko ogbalagaron din on ka soini no kouyagan din kai to tano su puun to ian din on ogtumanon ka ogkoiniatan ku, duon ka kalipuasan din to mohuri no allow.
bunbun
Ong-ongora nu to kalayati to kayu no wà pad napolod.
Sagboka ku
balow
Ko ogkadugi ka pa-a ta, ogkuiton ta to dagum oyow ogka-awò ka dugi.
Nokoy ka ogtu-uron nu?
No, soini ka katamanan no ignangon ku kaniu. No og-awoson no tibo kaniu, ogkasagboka ka goinawa now woy ka doromdom now. Woy parakdakoloy kow to goinawa now unawa to patalasulod kow on ian. Pohoyhoy-uoy kow woy kono kow ogparakoldakol.
Ko du-on darua no ogpalawod, no ko ka sagboka oghun-a no songo tikù ka igkariù din, no oggapunon din on, no ogko-umaan din on.
talis
Ko mabogat ka og-alapon to duma ta, ogtomuon ta to ogbulig.
Ogpakatu-u ka ko ogkatagaan nu.
ilù
No sikanak, nighimu a to Magboboot no suguanon din oyow ogpakabulig a to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus. No ian to nig-alam a rin su oyow ogpakabulig a kaniu woy su oyow ka soini no kinagian to Magboboot, ogkaay-ayaran ku ignangonnangon dio to agad hontow otawa.
No si Sakarias, nigtinuru din no maningkalagan din to ogkuon din ka ogsulatan din no insulat si Sakarias to, “Si Huan ka ngaran din.” No, nabolongbolong ka tibo no mgo otow.
Ko magaan ogkapawo to allow to Dominggo, niglouy si Maria Magdalina to pigsabalan. Ko nokouma dio nigkita rin to noonsig ka batu no inlokob to pilang.
Tugtug kow
bunù
malonang so goinawa
Ko du-on ogsugù no ogpanhimatayan, ogtuman sikandin
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to, “A mgo taga Hirusalim. Kaniu ka oghimatoy to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot woy ogdogpakon now to batu oyow ogkamatoy ka mgo otow no nigsugu to Magboboot dio to kaniu. Malasi a porom ogkopkop to tibo no anak nu no unawa to upa no oglimuron din no ogkupkupan din ka mgo piak din, di wa kow man nigbogoy,” kagi ni Hisus.
po-it
Ogtokoron ta to si Hisu Kristu ka talagsulat no nigpatuu kaniu ligkat to innangonnangon noy kaniu. Di kono no tinta ka insulat din woy songo kono no batu no manipis ka nigsulatan. Di ka Gimukud to Magboboot ka nigsulat dio to goinawa now.
kali-a-an
bugsong
oon-ing ka baloy di sagboka rò ka ogkapurut.
Agad hondoi no lunsud ko kono kow ogpalopowan,” kagi, “ko ogpokohipanow kow on no ogligkat to sikan no lunsud, topungi now ka paa now oyow ogkaawo ka basak no igpatokod now to waro labot now to sikan no lunsud ko oglogparan sikandan to Magboboot,” kagi ni Hisus.
Nò, duon dio to Damasku no sakup ni Hisus, no oghingaranan ki Ananias. Duon impapitow kandin no nigpaatawan. No nigkita rin ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. Kagi ni Hisus kandin to, “Ananias.” No nigtabak si Ananias to, “Lagboy no Igbuyag ku, soini a.”
baloy
Ka mgo boni no nakasawod dut batuon no tano ogkounawa ian to mgo otow no nigpamminog to nangnangonon bahin to kinagian to Magboboot no magaan ogtuu sikandan woy lagboy no ogkarago sikandan to ogpamminog.
Pogligad on to tatolu no allow ligkat to pogdatong ni Pablo, impaangoy rin on ka mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu duon to Ruma. Poglimud dan on, kagi ni Pablo kandan to, “Mgo sulod, agad to waro salo ku to mgo duma ta woy to mgo batasan ta, di nigpirisu ad on dio to Hirusalim woy imbobogoy ad on dio to mgo igbuyag no nigligkat to gobirnu no kai to Ruma.
Sikan ian mgo sulod, og-awoson to songo oglibuwas ki to lunsud no oghondio ki kandin oyow ogpakalagkos ki to kasiporan din.
asawa
Ian su ko ogsilag ki woy ko ogbalagaron ta ka duma ta oyow ogpakapurut ki to kanta no koiniatan, duon on ogkohimu no samuk woy ka agad nokoy no maroot no batasan.
Du-on otow no konò ogpakakita su nabolobog ka mata din su na-akoban to mapotì.
Dokad di, nigboot si Hisus to oyow nigbogayan kow to Gimukud to Magboboot no sikan ian to waro now awosa no duon otow no og-anad kaniu ko hondoi ka tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon su ka Gimukud to Magboboot ka ogpohitaga kaniu to tibo ko tu-tuu woy ko kono. Ka tu-tuu ro ka ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot. Waro ubat no ogligkat kandin. Sikan ian, layun now gogongoni si Hisu Kristu unawa to in-anad to Gimukud to Magboboot kaniu.
Oglayag ka sikan no igbat-ow dio to tibo no igmarusilom to goinawa to mgo otow. Waro nakagdoog ka marusilom dio to sikan no malayag.
Ian su duon madmaroyow no tuud to Magboboot kantanow, su ian goinawa rin to woy rin do ogbogayan sikandan to tibo no karoyawan no innangon din kandan dongan ko songo ogpakalagkos kinow rod.
Ko tig-allow, malayat no gulabung.
ga-ang
kun
lapas
nignangonan din ka mgo otow to, “Libuwas kow tibo; waro mamatoy ka bato, nohirogo do tigbal.” Nò, nigngisian dan si Hisus.
Pogkaponga, noiniatan ni Apulus no ogtalipag on no oghondio to lunsud to Girisia. No ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to Episu, nigbulig kandin to nigsulatan dan ka mgo otow no nigtuu no taga Girisia woy nigbuyu kandan oyow ogpaamuton on si Apulus dio to kandan. Pogkouma on ni Apulus dio to Girisia, nigbuligan din ka goinawa to mgo otow no nigtuu on ki Hisus su ligkat to pogkohoy–u ni Hisus kandan.
Ka uripon, ka talagbanwa to baloy ka tagtuun kandin. Kono amana no ogpokougpo dio to sagboka no lunggunan. Di ka anak to talagbanwa, patalaamoy ian taman to katamanan.
iman
hanupul
bosì
ligkang
dalom
Pogkouma ran on dio to baloy to sika igbuyag to anaranan to mgo og-ampu, nakitaan dan ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no nasasow no ogmansisinogow woy ogpandawit no maagbot.
so-ilang
Nò, pogdinog to mgo otow to nignangon si Pablo to duon allow uromo no ogkouyag on ka mgo nammatoy, duon ka nanumsumpalit. Di duon duma no nigkagi atag to, “Libong ka ro kai su oghutuk koy porom no ogpamminog to soini no ignangonnangon nu.”
bugsù
kayow
songa
Ka lituk to ogkatangkob ka allow, ogsalop on ka allow. Ogkaloplop on.
Duon ka songo boi no nigduma no sampulu ka tuid din woy darua ka garamon din to langosa rin no kono ogtigpok.
banggot
gotok
Pogkaponga, duon dangob no lagong no nigdinog ku. Kagi rin to, “Sikaniu no mgo sakup ku, awo kow on to sikan no lunsud oyow kono kow ogkaayat to mgo maroot no batasan din no ogpakasalo kow on no songo ogpakalagkos kow to kandin no logpad.
su ka kouyagan ta, kono do ogpuun to koonon, no ka pulus to lawa ta, kono do ogpuun to sabinit ta.”
bolodbod
harok
Ogpakarungkù ki su ogkahallok ki no ogkito-on ki.
Di nokani pad, nahan ku no maroyow ko mohon–ing ka oghimuon ku no ig–atu ku to mgo otow no nigtuu to ngaran ni Hisus no taga Nasarit.
Nò, kagi rin kandan to, “Nigpasulat to Magboboot to Tahan no Kasulatan to, ‘Oghingaranan ka baloy ku ka baloy no ampuanan.’ ” Di kagi ni Hisus, “Nighimu now soini no baloy no holosanan to mgo takawon.”
Si Hudas no anak ni Simon Iskarioti ka innangon din. Su si Hudas, agad kandin ka duma no hibatoon no nig-alam ni Hisus, ogtaboron din pad si Hisus.
No ka tag sagboka to sikan no sampulu woy daruwa no gumawan to lunsud, hinimu to sagboka no ogkoiling to baliog no ogkohingaranan to pirlas. No ka mgo dalan to sikan no lunsud, inhimu to bulawan no waro solug no ogkoiling to lamita su mating-ow.
su nighondini a no ogligkat dio to langit pogtuman to pogboot to sika nigsugu koddi. Kono ian no tuud ku to ogtuman to koddi no goinawa.
Ka soini no sulat, ogligkat kanami no si Pablo, woy si Silas woy si Timoteo no igpaalap noy kaniu no taga Tisalunika no nohimu on no sakup to Magboboot no ian Amoy ta woy sakup dod ni Hisu Kristu no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
to oyow sikaniu, lagkos to tibo no nigpasakup to Magboboot, ogpakasabut kow to dakol lagboy ka goinawa ni Hisu Kristu kanta no kono ogkasokod.
lalung
pangkak
Nò, su nigmarayandayan sikandin no ian din umalagon ka kandin no ogkoiniatan, ogkoiling dod to sikan ka ogkoumaan to kandin no igkabaybayari. Ian su ka sikan no maroot no boi no ian igpananglitan to sikan no dakol no lunsud, nigkagi to, ‘Sikanak no boi no igbuyag, ogpakaalap to pandatuan ku, no waro igkoil-ilui ku. Kono a ogkoumaan to igpandawot ku su waro a man nabalu.’
Kagi ni Pedro kuwo kandin, “Buyag, manio to kona a ogpakasundul koykow kuntoon? Nigpanagana ad to ogpakimatoy a no ogduma koykow.”
piliti
pangisis
lo-in
kalusisi
no kagi ran to, ‘Uromo, kanta no mgo Hudiu ogpangabangan ki bahin to mgo usig ta no ogkaawo ka katondanan to agad hontow no ogpangusig kanta.’
Nigbunsud do no nig-alap dan dio to tangkaan din ka sagboka no suguanon din no nokoutang dio to igbuyag din to pila buwa no milyon no salapi.
dagmoy
Ka sikan no mgo talag-anad to ubat, ogpounug to kandan no batasan su oghonduon sikandan to nakaloko to balaod no ogpokohimu sikandan ko nokoy ka ogkoiniatan dan. Dokad di, ka sikan no mgo talag-anad, nouripon lagboy sikandan to maroot no mgo batasan dan su nataga ki, ko nokoy ka ogpakaboot kanta, sikan ian ka ogpokouripon kanta.
Nò, subla ka poglogpad to sikan no maroot no suguanon woy igparuma to mgo otow no patuutuu ro so pogtuu ran dio to hapuy no waro katamanan. Ogngangang sikandin woy ogkikigot ka mgo ngipon din su moinit on ian lagboy ka hapuy.”
murumuru
son-ad
buliburan
Nigtabak ni Hisus kandan to, “Nig-unawa ka kakogal to ulu now to duma no mgo otow. Waro kow makasabut?” Nigparagas to oglituk. Kagi rin, “Waro agad nokoy no og-abolongon ta ka ogpokoligsom to otow oyow kono ogpakatangko to Magboboot.
awang
No igbogoy now on ka sikan no otow ki Satanas oyow ogkalogparan on ka lawa rin di mangkuwan ogkapangabangan do ka gimukud din to allow on to poglibong ni Hisus no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta kai to soini no kalibutan.
iam
hinanow
dakop
logon
guguli
umpung
Duon dod oghimuon dan. Oggawayan dan ka mgo balu oyow og-agawan dan ka igkouyagi ran. Ogmalayaton dan ka ig-ampu dan to Magboboot oyow ogparinogon dan ka mgo otow ko og-ampu sikandan. Di sikandan, dakoldakol ka iglogpad to Magboboot kandan to mohuri no allow.”
balagonon
no kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Lagboy a noiniat to ogtugon a pad kaniu to soini no pagkoonan to Pagkoonan to Paligad ko kona a pad ogpoko-uma to igkohirapi ku
No ian to namatoy si Hisu Kristu no inliwan to tibo no mgo otow su oyow sikandan no nabogayan on to iam no pogkouyag, konad on ogtuman to kandan do no koiniatan. Di ian dan ogtumanon ka igkoiniat ni Hisu Kristu su sikandin ka namatoy woy nouyag on to oyow ogkapangabangan din sikandan.
gutasan
Nò, mgo sulod no indakoli kud to goinawa, su duon ka sikan no innangon to Magboboot kanta, og-awoon tad on ka agad nokoy no maroot no duon to batasan ta woy ka dio to goinawa ta. No ogpoomot ki to ogtuman to sikan no maroyow no ogkaayun to goinawa to Magboboot oyow waro solug no maroot to mgo batasan ta. No sikan ka og-awoson no igtahud ta kandin.
pannubad
Nokoy now si Apulus woy ko sikanak no si Pablo? Sikanami, mgo suguanon koy to Magboboot, no ligkat to pog-anad noy kaniu nigtuu kow on kandin. Di waro loin no oghimuon noy ko kono do no ka pogtuman noy to insugu din to tag sagboka kanami.
Woy duon ingkasulat ni Dabid dongan tongod dod to mgo Hudiu. Kagi rin to Magboboot to: “Bogayi nu to oyow ka igkohoy-u nu poron kandan, ogkohimu on no lit-ag oyow ogpakasagad sikandan, woy to oyow ogkoiling to ogkatiklobu sikandan to lungag no litos ian no iglogpad kandan to mgo salo dan.
“Woy kono kid ogpokohoo woy songo kono kid ogpokounug to mgo batasan no ig–anad dan su ogpakasalo ki to mgo balaod to gobirnu ta no dio to Ruma,” kagi ran.
Banlak
Ko ogkatkaton ka lubid, ogkotongon ka lubid.
Konò a ogko-iniat ko du-on ogpurut. Ka lituk to sikan, ogkannugun on.
Nò, noiniatan ku to ogkabatukan ku ko nokoy ka igbabayung to mgo Hudiu ki Pablo. Sikan ian to inhatod ku pad sikandin dio to nalimud on ka mgo pogbuyagon dan.
Kagi ni Hisus kandin, “Igi, warad on ka goramon nu su nigtuu kad koddi. Litos ian ko og-uli kad dio to baloy nu su nabawian kad on. Malinowon kad.”
hugyup
Di sikanta no nigtuu, ian ta ogkounawaan ka mgo kuron no magaan ogkaraat di duon soini no mahal no kabogbogan no intagu kanta. Ian su oyow ogpakasabut ka mgo otow to dio do ogligkat to Magboboot ka soini no dakol no kabogbogan no nig-alap noy, no kono ogligkat kanta no otow ro duon.
Pogkaponga ku to oghondio to Hirusalim no ko igkabogoy kud on ka ogkaalap ku ka igbulig kandan, ogligkat ad on poron to oghondio to Espanya no ogsagpit a dio to kaniu dio to Ruma.
no nigbogayan on to kinabo no igsaluub din no malinis woy malayag.” No ka lituk to sikan no maroyow no manggad, ian ka maroyow no mgo hinimuan to mgo sakup to Magboboot.
No ko og-ampuan ku sikaniu tibo, ogkarago a lagboy
Di nigsasindog on si Pedro longod to sikan no sampulu woy sagboka no duma rin no suguanon ni Hisus. No nigpaagbotan din on to nignangon to mgo otow to, “Sikaniu no mgo duma ku no mgo Hudiu woy tibo kaniu no mgo taga Hirusalim, pamminog kow to soini no ignangon ku kaniu oyow ogpakasabut kow.
Songo ogkounawa kow to igbat-ow to goinawa to tibo no mgo otow. Ka lunsud no dio to ampow to bubungan kono atag ogpokoholos.
ligad
Di tongod to mgo diwata to Magboboot, soini ro atag ka kagi rin. Kagi to sulat to, “Ka pogsugu din to mgo diwata din, ogkoiling to kalamag woy ko logdog no hapuy.”
Sikoddi, nig-alam ad to Magboboot no Amoy ku no nigsugu a rin kai to kalibutan. Nò, manio naan to ogbayung now to ogsumpalit a to Magboboot to pignangonan kud sikaniu to Anak a to Magboboot?
No nigdapig pad si Hisus to mgo hibatoon din, no ka kariui to igdapig din, tigbal do no songo pogdogpak to batu, no nigluhud si Hisus no nigkagian din ka Magboboot. Kagi rin,
Kono ta og-ol-ologan ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta su niglogparan to Magboboot ka duma no otow no nig-ol-olog kandin no pinangagat on sikandan to mgo ulod no nammatoy on.
hirogò
Ka tibo no mgo otow, nakakita on to nokohiphipanow on ka sikan no otow woy to ogsayoon din ka Magboboot.
Warò a nig-iman-iman to ogka-anad ku ka amoy woy ka anak.
Di si Timoteo atag, natagaan now tahan to maroyow ka batasan din su nounawa sikandin ko lagboy no anak ku su nigbuligan a rin to og-alap-alap to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon.
lisag
Di nigsaparan on to kapitan to oyow kono ogkatooran ka tuud dan su ogkoiniatan din no ogpangabang ki Pablo. No nigsugu din ka ogkatou to oglumbuk oyow sikandan ka oghun–a no ogtinugpu dio to woig oyow oglumbuk on no oghondio to pantad.
kopkop
No ka tahan no nig-abin to Magboboot, songo tahan no nigtuuran din to oyow og-unug on sikandan to Anak din no si Hisu Kristu oyow si Hisus ka ogkohimu on no kakoy to mohon-ing on no mgo hari rin.
Nokani, waro pulus nu kandin. Di kuntoon, dakol on ka pulus ta kandin.
Ogsomod ka tabò.
busow
oyow ka tibo no ogtuu koddi ogkootawan do no waro katamanan dio to Magboboot.”
Ko ogsandag ki no igsugbù ta ka ngalap, ogsilsil ka mo-init. Oglagsik ka mantika no ogkasubukan to ngalap.
Maro-ot so tu-ud nu
Nò, su waro igduwaruwa to goinawa ku to maroyow ka goinawa now kanami, sikan ian to noiniatan ku no oghun-a a no ogpanumbaloy dio to kaniu oyow ogkabogayan ku sikaniu to daruwa no igkarago to goinawa now.
nanoy
banban
Nandani ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus kandin no nig-inso dan to, “Nataga ka to masakit so goinawa to mgo Parisiu to innangon nu?”
Nighutuk man do niglibong si Hisus dio oyow to og-ampu. Kagi rin to, “Amo, ko kono ogkohimu no og-awoon nu ka igkabaybayari ku, koykow no pogboot ka ogkatuman.”
bagtù
bulan
now
bagoloy
Nò, ko olin-olin no mata ka lawa ta no waro talinga ta, ogmonuon ta to oyow ogpakarinog ki? Woy ko olin-olin no talinga ka lawa ta no waro irung ta, ogmonuon ta oyow ogpakangarog ki?
Ian to ogkoiling a su maroyow now to og-aguantoon ka kagi to sikan no mgo ogkaangol-angol no ogmarayandayan su nahan now to pandoy kow no mgo otow.
Ko nalutù on ka babuy, og-il-ilon dan ka bokog no du-on pad sapu.
Masugsugkuroy ki
Usigon ku
Kagi ni Hisus to sikan no boi to, “Ka pogtuu nu koddi ian nakalipuas koykow to mgo salo nu. Hipanow kad on su malinow on ka goinawa nu dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.”
Nò mgo sulod ku no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no duon dakol no igkaroyawi rin, og-awoson to og-un-unawoon ta ka igbogoy tad no igtahud to mgo datu woy ko publi no otow.
pintik
Nò, onow kow on woy sasindog kow on. Soini on ka sikan no lukos no ogpanabod koddi. Ogtagbuon tanow sikandan.”
tambabò
Sikan ian no duon pananglitan ni Hisus no intabak din kandan. Kagi ni Hisus to,
Sugù ka dò
Unuga nu ka soini no mgo ig-udling ku kaniu woy poomoti nu ro to oghimu oyow ogpakakita ka tibo no mgo otow to ungod ogkatimtimulan on ka pogtuman nu to ogkoiniatan to Magboboot.
itu-os
salig
balisusù
tangkap
Nignangon sikandan to, “Buyag, naroromdoman noy no to duon pad ka sikan no ubaton no otow, nignangon to, ‘To ogkamatoy a, ogkabuhi a ro to igkatatolu no allow ligkat to pogkamatoy ku.’
Woy ogkitoon dan ka langlanguwan din woy igkasulat ka ngaran din dio to mgo bukod dan.
Ko buyag ka og-ingol, ogpogospogos no ogduma.
Duon otow no nigsoloran to busow no noomaw. Nò, to nigdogil ni Hisus ka busow, nakakagi on ka otow. Nabolongbolong ka nalibulung no mgo otow.
luak
Nò, nighimu si Libi to dakol no pagkoonan dio to baloy rin oyow woy ki Hisus. Mohon-ing ka mgo talagkubla to buhis no nig-amut to pagkoonan, woy duon dod duma no mgo otow no nig-amut no nigkoon.
Nò, pighutuk dan dakopa poron si Hisus di nakabutuas do duon sikandin.
Ayad-ayad kow to oyow kono kow ogkaalap to sikan no mgo usig to Magboboot su maroot ka oghimuon dan su og-anad sikandan to, woy ki kun ogkohimu no sakup to Magboboot ko ogpatuli ki.
Sikan ian to nigbanggutan dan on ka bolad woy ka paa ni Pablo su ogbarasan dan porom sikandin di kagi ni Pablo to sagboka no kapitan no nigsasindog to longod din to, “Ko ogbarasan nu ka nasakup to gobirnu to Ruma to waro now pad in–insoi ko duon salo din, kono kow buwa ogpokounug to sikan no balaod dan,” kagi ni Pablo.
No kagi ni Pedro to, “Kuntoon, waro agad hontow no ogpakasapad to soini no mgo otow ko ogkoiniatan dan to ogpabautismu on su songo nigbogayan on man sikandan to Gimukud to Magboboot no ogkoun–unawa to nigbogayan kid nokani.”
sinombung
Kuntoon mgo sulod, paragas kow tibo to pog-unug now to mgo hinimuan ku, woy unugi now ka batasan to mgo otow no songo og-unug to mgo maroyow no hinimuan noy.
Agad si Hirodis,” kagi, “songo waro nakitaan din no salo ni Hisus su manio naan to impalibong din kai to kanta. Nò, ka ignangon ku kaniu,” kagi ni Pilatu, “waro nohimu ni Hisus no litos to ogkamatoy sikandin.
dagusu
Sikan ian, sulod, kohoy-ui a nu su patalasulod ki to pogtuu ta to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Kristu, no tumani a nu bag ka intugun ku tongod ki Unisimu su nasalupung ka goinawa ta ki Hisu Kristu. Ian oyow ogmaawang on ka goinawa ku.
Poglibuwas dan, duon mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no nigbabakus to sagboka no igbuyag to anaranan to mgo Hudiu no si Sustinis. No duon do ian to tangkaan to sikan no husayanan, nigbabarasan dan. Di warad sagmana ni Galiu ko ogmonuon dan.
ganuy
atingig
Kagi ni Hisus to, “Manio to ungoron a now oghingarani to Buyag, di kono kow man ogpaagad-agad to igkagi ku kaniu?
bano-ulì
Pogkaponga ran to nigsulat, impohipanow ran on ka oghatod to sulat. No to pogdatong dan dio to Antiokia, impalimud dan on ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus woy imbogoy ran on ka sulat no nig–alap dan.
pinayag
Ka mgo pinanganak ni Libi no nohimu on no mgo talagpanubad, woy ka duma ran no songo Hudiu, tibo kandan, pinanganak dod ni Abraham. Di agad naan, duon Balaod ni Moisis tongod to sikan no mgo talagpanubad, to og-awoson dan to ogkuwon dio to duma ran no mgo Hudiu, ka igkasampulu no baad to pog-ugpo dan.
No ian su oyow ogpakadoromdom woy ogpakapamangho ka mgo otow to Magboboot oyow ogkabatukan dan porom sikandin. Di kono man no mariu kanta ka Magboboot.
Pogkokoon dan, nigkagi si Hisus to, “Ognangonan ku sikaniu no duon sagboka kaniu kai no igpanabod a rin oyow ogkohimatayan a.”
bu-ang
No si Pablo daruwa ki Birnabi, nig–atuan dan sikandan to nigmalayat on ka pogpaap–apuloy ran. Sikan ian, ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to Antiokia, nigsugu dan si Birnabi woy si Pablo woy ka duma no mgo taga Antiokia oyow oghondio to Hirusalim su og–insaan dan ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus woy ka mgo pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu no dio to Hirusalim. No ian dan ig–inso ko og–awoson to mgo lukos no kono no Hudiu to ogtumanon dan ka batasan to Hudiu to igpatuli ka lawa ran.
tagù
Nigparagas si Hisus to, “Nokoy pad buwa ka ogpounawaan ku ka kuntoon no mgo otow?
Ka otow no kono ogduma koddi, sikan ka og-atu koddi. Woy ka otow no kono ogbulig koddi to oglimud to mgo otow, ogpasuwayon din ka mgo otow.
Duon songo talag-anad to Balaod to mgo Hudiu no nighondio ki Hisus su og-ol-ologan din poron ogpasayopa sikandin to igtabak din to inso din kandin. Kagi rin ki Hisus to, “Maistru, ogmomonu ad oyow ogkabogayan a to kouyagan no waro katamanan?”
Waro lawa to Magboboot no kono ki ogpakakita kandin no pinabayo to Gimukud din woy malogot no pogsimba ta ka litos do no pogsimba ta kandin.”
Di kuntoon, ogpokohipanow a pad no oghondio a to lunsud to Hirusalim su duon ogkaalap ku no igbulig to mgo otow no nigtuu no nasakup to Magboboot.
Ogpatokoron din to ogbobootan to Magboboot ka tibo no makasasalo su unawa ki Satanas no nigbobootan on to Magboboot to kandin no igkalogpad.”
Ko ogpamantang, ogbabantayan nu ka sawog no diò pad to mariù. Ko ogpakalongod ka ogbayò, ogpamantangon on to ogpamilak.
Du-on ogpan-ogot no bo-bò dò. Du-on ogpanlampos ko og-ogot.
wasoy
gongon
Pogpamanoik man do woy si Pablo, nanlotiblotib on to paan woy nigkokoon on. Pogkaponga, napawaan on ka mgo otow woy ki Pablo no nigpanangnangonoy. Pogkapawo, nighipanow on si Pablo.
Nò, su ogtokoron ta no Amoy ta ka Magboboot no ogsampiton ta, og-awoson to lagboy tad ogtahuron sikandin to kai kinow pad og-ugpo to tano. Ian su ogbobootan din ka tibo no mgo otow kai to tano no waro og-umalagon din ko nokoy ka mgo batasan to tag sagboka kandan.
No duon nigdinog ku no nigkagi kanak to, ‘Pedro, sasindog ka. Himatayi nu ka ogkoonon nu.’
Nokogsolsol to naka-asawa.
tamak
gupal
bunhit
“Ka goinawa noy ian to ogkapulusan to Magboboot ka Pandatuan no ogpokouma. Ko ogpokouma on ogkounawa ian to sikan no pandatuan to kabuybuyagan ta no si Dabid no Labow no Igbuyag dongan. Ogkasayo ka Magboboot.”
usig
To-to-on ka kayu ko konò ogkato-u no ogtigbas.
No dio din ipapinpinnuu si Hisus to kawanan din su sikandin ka insabuk din no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy Talagpangabang kanta. No ian to oyow sikanta no pinanganak ni Israil, ogsonditon woy og–ongkoran ta ka maroot no batasan ta, no ogpasayluon din on ka mgo salo ta.
Konò kow ogsawo-sawò su si-ak, so-in a dod.
Waro ian iholos ka kagi rin kandan. Ian in-awoy ni Pedro si Hisus woy nigbunsud to ogsaparan din porom sikandin.
Salilung dò ko igbogoy kanta.
ponod
Ka otow no lagotong dò ka ogkagi, malul-id dò ka ogkagion. Konò ogkasuwoysuwoy ka kagi rin.
“Awoson no kono now himua ka kaniu no tumanon bahin to Balaod dio to tangkaan to mgo otow oyow ogkitoon kow,” kagi ni Hisus. “Ko soini ka oghimuon now kono kow on ogsulian to maroyow ligkat to Magboboot no Amoy tanow dio to langit.
basiow
kilow
ti-tì
Nò, nig-agpas nigsasindog no niglu-ung din ka malayat no kinabo din no nigdalapak ki Hisus.
“Duon pad man do dangob no pananglitan ni Hisus. Kagi rin, “Duon sagboka no otow no darua ka anak din no noolin no lukos.
Songo allow, nigsasindog si Hisus dio to marani to dakol no lanow no nighingaranan dan to Lanow to Hinisarit, no napipi on si Hisus dut mgo otow no ogpandanirani kandin su ogkoiniatan dan to ogpamminog to kagi bahin to Magboboot.
Ko du-on otow no ogdaralu, ogbayung to nigtandog to gamot. Naan no nigsabukan on.
Nò, pogkita to mgo taga Malta to ulod no nigbibitoy to bolad ni Pablo, kagi ran to, “Talagbunu naan ka soini no otow su agad to waro malonod to dagat, boot to Magboboot to ulod ka igkamatoy rin no igbayad to salo din,” kagi ran.
Ian su nigbogayan kinow on to Magboboot to iam no pogkouyag no waro nigligkat to otow no ogkamatoy. Di nigligkat atag to Magboboot no kono ogkamatoy. No ka kinagian din no kono ogkaawo, ian ingkabogoy to sikan no kouyagan ta no waro katamanan.
Nakarinog ka tibo no mgo otow dio to mgo ugpaan no marani bahin to soini no nohimu.
Kagi to songo otow to, “Maniò to so-ini no nig-alad?” Ogtabak koy to, “Nigpulù noy su ogboni-on.”
kalipuan
Anoy ki oglibonglibong no ogtalabao no ogkapolaan ad.
Ka kalatkat, darua ka igsandig no du-on ka igbalabag, no ian ka kalatkat.
Ko ogkataga koy to og-unug kow on to goinawa to Magboboot, no ko duon dod duma no kono ogpaagad-agad to sikan no tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon, oglogporan ku man ka sikan no mgo otow.
Di kono kow ogtuu su kono kow no duma to sikan no mgo sakup ku no oghingaranan ku to karniru ku.
Ka tubod, maroyow ka balisusù ko oggulayon.
Si Hosias amoy ni Joaquin woy ka mgo sulod din. Sikan ka allow to pogdakop to mgo matig Babilonia to mgo matig Israil woy to pog-alap dio to ugpaan no oghingaranan to Babilonia.
Sikan ian ka mgo otow no ogligkatan to ogkagulak on to pogdumaruma to mgo otow no nigtuu. No ian ogpakaalap kandan ka tahan no mgo ogkoiniatan to mgo otow to soini no kalibutan. No ka Gimukud to Magboboot, waro dio to goinawa ran.
Koykow ka ogtayowtow, kanak ka ogtinawò.
awoy
Wa pad mokouma si Hisus dio to lunsud. Dio pad to dalan no natagbu rin si Marta.
Nò, pogpitow to sikan no mohon–ing no mgo otow to sikan no nohimu ni Pablo, nigpaagbot sikandan to nigkagi to kinagian dan no Linikaonian to, “Mgo magboboot nanaan ka sikan no nigpoiling dan to mgo otow woy namanoug nanaan kanami.”
dalom
Kagi ni Hisus to “Uromo ko ogkatuman on ka allow to ogbobootan to Magboboot ka mgo otow, dodoisok pad ka iglogpad din to mgo taga Tiru woy ka mgo taga Sidon to kaniu no taga Korasin woy taga Bitsaida su dakoldakol ka iglogpad kaniu.
sipala
Di igbogoy to Magboboot ka boni to sikan no lawa no og-alamon din. No to tag sagboka no lupogas no boni, igbogoy rin ka litos no lawa to sikan ian no boni.
kogal
Igparong ku ka dawa, mong agoloy.
Du-on soping ni Duti.
Ko’gsalopung[on]??, supsupon ka moilow’n langosa to manuk.
pamminog
binaklid
Nokogdongan to sikan no pog-alkuy to mgo Parisiu, woy ka udling ni Hisus, ogkatimtimulan on ka mgo otow dio taman to nalimud on ka pila buwa no libu duon. Mohon-ing on ian sikandan no ogpokogdiokdiok on. Nighun-a ni Hisus kagii ka mgo hibatoon din. Kagi rin, “Bantoy kow to igpatulin to paan to mgo Parisiu su ian ka pogkarakoldakol dan.”
damoy
pulan
sagop
siin
kogal
Nigpanag–ilis koy to marani to pulu to Krita. Di mohirap ka pogkabayo noy, no nokouma koy on to duunganan to barku no pighingaranan to Maroyow no Duunganan. Ka sikan, nigmarani ro to lunsud to Lasia.
Ka nato-uan noy to nigsiminal koy, songo ig-ulit noy ka natagaan noy diò to mgo otow no ogbogayan to mgo dimanu.
kawigin
sa-ab
Ko du-on igholon ku to nati to kalabow di ko konò ku ogkato-od to igbayad, konad ig-ulì ka inkoholon ku no salapì su igbonnal on.
ul-ul
bangkalow
topung
subal
pogkot
Su ian mgo sulod, igpariralom ta ka goinawa ta to Magboboot; di og-atuan ta si Satanas no ian igbuyag to mgo busow no ogpakapallaguy on sikandin.
Ka tibo no mgo otow no ogtuu to si Hisus ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan no oghingaranan ki Kristu, mgo anak to Magboboot sikandan. No ko tu-tuu ian to indakoli to songo otow ka Amoy ta no ka Magboboot, ogpakalagkos dod to igdakoli rin ka mgo anak din.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan. Kagi rin to, “Koddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan ka sika otow no nigpamula to maroyow no mgo boni.
Malogot ian ka ignangon ku kaniu. Waro agad hontow no ogkabogayan to karoyawon dio to Pandatuan to Magboboot woy ki Kristu ko maroot ka mgo batasan din, woy ko duon batasan din to ogpan-ayat to dangob no otow oyow oghimu to maroot no batasan, woy ko oggogolgol sikandin to mgo kalaglagan. Ian su ka sikan no mgo koibogan, ogkounawa to inotow-otow no ian ta ogsimboon.
su ka sikan, ogpokounug to Tahan no Kasulatan no kinagian to Magboboot no ingkasulat dongan to,“Ko ogpapandiokan nu to baka ka trigu oyow ogkapupu kono nu ogpungoton ka bo-bo din.”Woy duon dangob no ingkasulat to,“Litos no ogkabayaran ka otow no ogtalabau.”
songol
Nigkagi si Hisus to, “Ko matibo nu matuman, uli ka woy igbaligya nu ka tibo no mgo kalaglagan nu. Ka bayad to kalaglagan nu, ipambogoy nu to mgo publi no mgo otow, no duon dakol ka igkaratu nu dio to langit. Ko impambogoy nud on, libong ka kai no ogdurumaruma ka koddi.”
Bali pad naan inkatokow on ka sika sampulu no hibatoon din woy sagboka ki Hisus ko ogkokoon sikandan. Pigsawoy ni Hisus sikandan su makogal so ulu ran to wa nigtuu to sika nakakita kandin to nootawan on.
Ko duon duma now no ogpasuwoy to duma no mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisus, sapari nu sikandin oyow ogpakahagtong on. Ko kono ogpamminog, hutuka nu to igkarangob no pogsapad. Di ko kono pad man do ogpamminog, ogluwat kow on kandin to ogduma,
Ko mahapun on lagboy, nigdani ki Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din no kagi ran, Ogkahapunan ki kai to waro baloy.
bugtul
kopit
Di to tibo no oghimuon noy, igpapitow noy to suguanon koy ian to Magboboot su og-aguantoon noy ka mgo samuk, mgo igkohirapi noy, woy ka mgo igkasasow noy.
No ko duon otow no ogkohimu no sinaligan, og-awoson to ogkasaligan sikandin to ogtuman to igsugu to igbuyag din.
uwang
Tigbal a rrò nig-ol-olog to ogbuyù no nigbogayan a rin on.
Woy ka otow no duon hogot no ignangon din, no igpangulibot din ka langit songo inpangulibot din ka ngaran to Magboboot no og-ugpo dio to Langit.
Du-on otow no ogpanikop to kumang no ogbokad to batu oyow ogkapurut din ka kumang.
orag-orag
Nabolu sikandan su og–anaran woy ni Pedro ka mgo otow woy su ognangonan dan sikandan to duon pogkouyag uromo to mgo nammatoy su ogligkat to nouyag on si Hisus ligkat to kandin no kamatayon.
Pogpitow ran to waro woy si Pablo dio to solod, nigdakop dan on si Hasun woy pila buwa no duma no mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no nigganuy ran on sikandan dio to mgo igbuyag to lunsud. No nigbabansagon on to kagi ran to, “Agad hondoi ogdolog woy si Pablo no ogkohimu on no samuk. No kuntoon, songo nighongkai to soini no lunsud ta.
Ian ingkatu-on si Hisus.
Pogkaponga rin to nigkagi, nig-ongkoran on ni Hisus sikandan. Niglibuwas on no nigparagas sikandin dio to lunsud to Bitania su dio ian oghibat sikandin.
Nigsokol a.
No sikan no ogtubù to makamos no lasangan no ogko-iling to kolop, songo oglayag su du-on anamag.
sigupan
No, ungod ognangon si Huan ki Hirodis to, “Kono ogkaayun to Balaod ta to og-asawoon ta ka ipag ta ko wa pad mamatoy ka asawa rin.”
Ig-ulat ta ka homoy
bagtos
Nò, to waro pad nohimu ka soini no kalibutan, tahan do no nig-alam to Magboboot si Kristu no ogpapangabang kanta. Di kuntoon to tipouri, impayag din on sikandin kai to kanta oyow ogkapangabangan kinow on to mgo salo ta.
Ko du-on kapayas, maroyow no sugkalon.
no ogkagi sikandan to, “Hondoi buwa si Hisus no og-im-imanan now? Innangon din kun to oglibong kai to kalibutan, di ligkat dongan no nammatoy on ka mgo kaap-apuan ta, un-unawa ro man ka tibo no ogkohimu kai to ampow to tano, bunsud pad to nohimu ka soini no kalibutan.”
lawod
Ko nalibulung ka mgo otow, nigbuyu sikandan to ogtumanon ni Pilatu ka tahan no batasan din. Ko nigbuyu to mgo otow,
su ka imbogoy to duma no mgo otow, ka subla to igkaratu dan, di ka imbogoy to sikan no balu, in-ubus din ka salapi din no litos poron to koonon din.”
Waro pad otow no nokohondio to langit dio to Magboboot ko kono no sikoddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan no dia a nigpuun.”
Ian su to pogdinog ta to mgo kagi ran, ogkoiling to maroyow pandoy no kagi. Di waro pulus su ig-anad dan to kono no maroot ko ogtumanon ta ka mgo igkoibog to lawa ta. No sikan ian ka ig-ayat dan to mgo otow no iam pad nigtuu woy iam pad nig-awo to duma ran no duon maroot no mgo batasan dan.
sabandal
Ka mgo pinanganak ni Israil, ian dod ogkounawaan ka songo kayu no ulibu no ingkapamula woy nigtantanuran to Magboboot. Di duon mgo Hudiu no nounawa to tahan no sugpang no pig-awo to Magboboot. Di sikaniu no kono no Hudiu no nigtuu on, ian now nounawaan ka kayu no ulibu no waro ikapamula di nigkuwo to Magboboot sikaniu no ingkasumpul kow rin on dio to sikan no an-anayan no ingkapamula no Ulibu. No ian to oyow songo ogkatalaran kow to karoyawon no ingkabogoy rin to duma no mgo sakup din no Hudiu.
Ka mgo buyagbuyag no mgo lukos, talosona nu to oyow ogponoran dan ka mgo koiniatan to lawa ran no kono no litos. Og-awoson to litos ka batasan dan oyow ogkatahud sikandan to mgo otow, woy to oyow maroyow so goinawa ran. Woy og-awoson to masalig on ka pogtuu ran to tu-tuu ian no tinuuan. Songo og-awoson to ogdakolon dan ka goinawa ran to agad hontow woy to og-aguantoon dan ka mgo igkabaybayari ran.
lirù
Agad mointok.
Nigpallaguy ka sagboka no otow no og-angoy to songo doisok no kotson no nig-olod din to mangilu no bino no intuik din ka sika kotson to songo tukod no intaruwoy rin dio ki Hisus oyow ogsupsupon din. Kagi rin “Tagaran ta ro! Pitow ki ko oghondini kun si Ilias no igpalogsad sikandin to krus.”
silok
Sikan ian no nigkamoy ni Gobirnador Pilik si Pablo oyow ogkagi on. No kagi ni Pablo no igtabak to kagi ni Tirtulu to, “Ian maroyow ku, Buyag, to sikoykow ka ogpamminog kanak kuntoon to igtabak ku to soini no imbayung ni Tirtulu kanak su nalugoy kad on no talagboboot kai to probinsia to Hudia.
Nò, su songo imbogoy to Magboboot ka Gimukud din dio to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, no ogkounawa to imbogoy rin kanta no nokani no nigtuu kinow ki Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, ogmonuon kud to kono a man ogpakasapad to Magboboot ko nokoy ka oghimuon din kandan?”
ogbabaloy
Panalinga ka ko ogsaparan ka.
loowloow
Malogot ka tahan no kagi to, ‘Og-orok ka sagboka no otow no ian oggaani ka loin no otow.’ ”
dangob
No nanagpitsagpit sikandin dio to mgo lunsud no ogkabayaan din. No dakol ka ingkabulig din to igpohogot to pogtuu to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus. Pogkalugoy, nokouma on si Pablo dio to probinsia to Girisia.
Konò kow amana ogli-ag diò to tanò su ogkabaya-an kow to busow no ogdalangin to namatoy.
lukbù
Igngadngad ta ka kamanga to mgo mo-irob, wasoy, woy ko ilab oyow ogmagalang ka galang din.
lumogkod (poetic)
Di litos ian ko ogkarago ki no oghimu ki to dakol no igkarago ta su soini no hari nu, nounawa to namatoy sikandin, di kuntoon, nootawan dod,’ kagi to amoy rin. ‘Ka igkarua, ka hari nu, unawa to nalagak sikandin no kuntoon, nokouli do.’ Sikan ka kagi to amoy rin,” kagi ni Hisus.
Nalimudlimud ka tibo no mgo otow to lunsud dio to gumawan to baloy ni Simon.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Ko nabutud kow pa no waro kow makasabut, waro porom salo nu. Di kuntoon su nignangon kow man to nakasabut kow on, duon on salo now.”
hatod
bogat
Di manio to ogdinogon ta sikandan no ian on ogkaalap dan ka mgo kinagian ta no ogloinloin?
No, intugun to soin no patalahari no boi dio ki Hisus. no kagi ran, “Buyag, nigdaralu on ka lagboy no amigu nu no si Lasaru.”
undul
Ka otow no noko-utol to babuy, iglagalad din ka tiuk to babuy to kara baloy.
Woy kono ta ogkalingawan ka mgo duma ta no napirisu di songo ogkoiling ki to songo nakalagkos ki ro kandan to napirisu. Woy kono ta ogkalingawan ka mgo duma ta no nabaybayaran to mgo waro nigtuu no songo ogkoiling ki to songo nabaybayaran ki.
dongan
Agad na-an su maga-an a rò oglibong.
uru
Piglimud ni Hisus ka sikan no sampulu woy darua no hibatoon din, no nigbogayan din on sikandan to kabogbogan to ogpakarogil to agad nokoy no busow woy oyow songo ogpakabawi to agad nokoy no dalu to mgo otow.
Ko basu ka ogpokogdongkig, ogkagopang. Oglatingkik on.
sob-ung
suoy
Ko duon otow no nahan din no og-unug to goinawa to Magboboot di kono din do ogponoron ka kagi rin, ogkoubatan sikandin to goinawa rin no waro pulus to pog-ampu din.
bulut
Kagi ni Pistu to, “Igbuyag Agripa woy tibo kaniu no nalimud, soinid ian si Pablo, no ian ka ogkaboluan to tibo to mgo Hudiu. Agad ka dio to Hirusalim woy ka kai, nignangon kanak ka igkabolu dan woy nigbabansagon dan to ogkoiniatan dan to ogpohimatayan.
Nakarinog si Hisus no nigtabak atag ki Hairu to, “Ko ka ogkasasow to anak nu. Salig ka ro koddi su ogkoulian do.”
gusgus
papasan
Ian ku igtambag to sikan su duon on mgo balu no bato pad no nigsuwoy on ka goinawa ran ki Hisus no og-unug on ki Satanas
tingkik
Nò, si Moisis ka nigduma to mgo otow no nalimudlimud no ogmanhihipanow to sikan no holholawan. No ka sikan no suguanon to Magboboot no niglibuwas woy nig–al–alukuy ki Moisis dio to Bubungan to Sinai, ungod nigdumaruma kandin woy to mgo kaap–apuan ta. Woy nabogayan si Moisis to sikan no kinagian to Magboboot no ogpokouyag woy kono ogkahalin oyow songo igkabogoy rin kanta no mgo Hudiu,” kagi ni Istiban.
Nataga kow man porom to soini no mgo lawa ta, ogkounawa to sumpul to lawa ni Kristu. Sikan ian to kono no litos no oghimu ki to maroot dio to mgo boi no maroot ka batasan dan, su kono no litos ko ka sumpul to lawa ni Kristu, igbogoy ta dio to mgo boi no maroot so mgo batasan.
ligò
Omunaan no nig-inso si Pilatu, “Kono nu ogdinogon ka tibo soini no mgo igbayung dan koykow? Waro tabak nu?”
Nataga kow on porom to sikanta no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu, ogbulig kinow ki Hisus uromo ko ogbobootan din on ka mgo otow no waro nigtuu kai to kalibutan. Nò, ko ogpakaboboot ki to sikan no mgo otow, manio naan to kono kow ogpokohusoy to soini no mgo minalintok no samuk kuntoon?
Hutuk man do, pigduma ni Satanas si Hisus no nighondio to dakol no lunsud to Hirusalim. Dio, pigduma rin si Hisus dio to liliungan to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu.
ti-tì
Ko ogbugdang ki to ogkakamot diò to diralom.
ngisak
Pogkaponga, si Pablo woy ka mgo duma rin, nigsakoy on to barku no nigligkat to sikan no lunsud to Papus no dio mogduung to lunsud to Pirga no duon to probinsia to Pampilia. No dio to Pirga, si Huan no oghingaranan ki Markos, nig–ongkod on kandan no nig–uli on dio to Hirusalim.
Maniò to ian a now ogkago-onan to kuddò ka warò utang ku kaniu?
Soini ka kagi ni Hisus su duon kagi to mgo otow to “Nigsoloran si Hisus to busow.”
Du-on ogpanlopow no ogdogos.
hibukhibuk
tukulan
Mapawo, nigligkat koy man do no nokouma koy on dio to lunsud to Sisaria woy dio koy mogdatong to baloy ni Pilipi. Ian hulingon din ka og–alap–alap to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus. No sikandin dod ka sagboka no nakaamut to sikan no papitu no mgo lukos no naalam nokani no talagbulig to mgo suguanon ni Hisus no dio to Hirusalim. Duon koy ian nig–ugpo ki Pilipi.
itùn
Ian ta ogpanag-ilingan ka otow no ogpohimu to sabut ko hontow ka ogkabogayan to iggalat din ko ogkamatoy on. Di woy ro ogkabogayan ka otow to sikan no iggalat kandin ko ogkatagaan on to tu-tuu ian to namatoy on ka sikan no nigpohimu to sabut.
Ian to noumaan ka sikan no mgo otow to sikan oyow ogkabohog ka duma ran. Di impasulat to Magboboot ka sikan no nangnangonon oyow duon igkaanad kanta to oyow kono ki og-iling kandan su magaan kid on ogkoumaan to mohuri no allow no ogkatuman on ka tibo no ingkanangon dongan.
Sagboka ro poron ka og-awoson ta. Si Maria ka nig-alam to maroyow no ogpamminog koddi no kono man ogpakaagow to pig-alam din,” kagi ni Hisus.
Kò ka og-ulung-ulung to uobang
bangbang
Ka balatik, ka lit-ag woy balod, tibò du-on sa-id no ian ogpakabokat to sanggatan.
so
Anak do sikandin buwa to talaghimu to baloy woy si Maria ka inoy din. Ka mgo hari din si Santiago woy si Husi woy si Simon woy si Hudas.
Napalisan ka laplap ku.
pu-pù
Woy og-awoson to mohon-ing ka mgo otow no ogpakanangon to maroyow ka mgo nighimu rin unawa to nigtanudtanud to mgo bato, woy maroyow ka pogsagman din to magaliug, woy nigpoobos to nigbulig to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus, woy nigbuligan din ka mgo otow no nohirapan woy nigpoomotan din ka poghimu rin to agad nokoy no maroyow.
Toi pogo-i a pà to so-ini kapayas, noinug buad.
Nigpallaguy ka darua di matmatallong ka dangob ki Pedro no nokohun-a nigdatong dio to sabalanan.
baniwal
Nokogtungkuk ki
Di ka langosa ni Hisu Kristu no nigtulalug to pogkamatoy din, mahal lagboy no ian imbalukas to Magboboot kanta. No ian din nounawaan ka nati to karniru no waro maroot to lawa rin no igtubad to Magboboot.
tangkawal
Ko kai og-ugpò ka magintalunan to taliwarò, oglinglingutan on to mgo otow ka oggopas.
taktak
Di sagboka to sikan no mgo pogbuyagon, nignangon kanak to, “Kono kad on ogsinogow, su si Hisus ka mabantug no oghingaranan to Liun no ian kapunganan ni Huda woy ki Dabid no igbuyag dan dongan. No sikandin ka nakaroog ki Satanas. Sikan ian to duon katondanan din to ogloko to imparokot to sikan no ogbasoon.
Ka kayu no insugù ian on.
Dini to kanta, ka singku sintabus do ka litos to igboli to darua no manukmanuk no ogkoiling to ul-ul. Di waro agad sagboka kandan no ogkoulug dio to tano ko kono no pogboot to Magboboot.
baras
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ka ignangon ku kaniu, ogkounawa ian ko duon sagboka no makasasalo no otow no og-ongkod to salo din, subla pad ka igkarago dio to Langit tongod to sikan no otow. Dakoldakol pad ian to kasiaman woy sasiam no maroyow no mgo otow no nahan dan no waro iawos to ogsondit to salo dan.”
katkat
Ka anggam ku, ogkabalagoy pad to oghimu to baloy rin. Ian oghuno-on to ogsagman.
Ka oghun-a oglosut, ka hari su og-inagakon to kakoy.
di ko ian ta ro ogsagmanon ka nakasasabinit to maroyow no ogkagian ta sikandin to, “Kai ka ro ogpinpinnuu to soini no maroyow no pinnuuanan.” Di ogkagian ta atag ka publi to, “Kai ka ro ogsasasindog.” Woy ko ogkagian ta to, “Kai ka ro atag ogpinpinnuu to soog,”
Ko nakabayò ka gakit to mababow, ka balagon no ingu-os, natobtob woy natampod to batu.
ilag
Malikanun
songo
Sikan ian to nigbogoy ka Magboboot to dangob no allow to oyow duon duma no mgo ogpakasolod dio to himolayan din. No kuntoon on ka allow no imbogoy rin. Nataga ki to sikan su ko nalugoy on nammatoy ka sikan no an-anayan no mgo otow dongan no waro nigtuu, duon man do impasulat to Magboboot ki Dabid. No ka sikan, nokog-un-unawa ro to sikan no ingkanangon din kandan dongan. Kagi to, “Kuntoon, ko ogdinogon now ka kagi to Magboboot, pamminog kow; kono kow ogpagkol to goinawa now.”
Ko oglapas ki, og-aliguan ta ka maralom no og-abalang ki to mababow oyow konò ki ogka-alus diò to linow.
Ka soini no innangon ku kaniu, mgo sulod, igpanag-ilingan ku ka lawa ku woy ki Apulus. No ian su oyow ligkat kanami, ogkaanad kow to litos no pog-ugpo now no ogpokounug kow to ingkasulat no kinagian to Magboboot. Ian su og-awoson to kono now ogdakolon ka ngaran to sagboka no talag-anad kaniu woy kono now ogdoisokon ka ngaran to dangob.
Doromdoma now ka sikan no dakol no goinawa now kanak nokani. Balowbalawi now ka goinawa now woy himua now ka maroyow no nighimu now nokani to kabinunsuran to pogtuu now. Ian su ko kono now ogbalowbalawan ka goinawa now, oghondiaan ku sikaniu no og-awoon ku ka sabukanan to kaniu no ilawan.
uwang
bagtok
Ko masolom ogkalimud man do ka tibo no mgo otow dio ki Hisus dio to Dakol no Ampuanan dan su ogpamminog to kagi rin.
Pogmaawang on ka langit, duon nigkita ran no tano, di waro dan tokora ko nokoy no tanaa. Di to pogpitow ran, nakasuluk ka tano woy ogkaalindungan woy duon pantad. Sikan ian to nigtuud dan ko ogkohimu, no ogpaparagason dan porom ka barku dio to pantad.
Si Hisu Kristu ka niglogparan no nig-abin to kanta no salo no inlansang sikandin to krus oyow ogpakalagkos ki to kandin no kamatayon oyow kono kid on ogkaayat to mgo salo di ogbogayan ki to kandin to pogkouyag oyow ogkohimu tad on ka maroyow no batasan. No ligkat to napalian sikandin, noulian kinow on.
Ko konò ogko-opus to kagi, konò tad ogkatagaan ko nokoy ka ignangon kanta.
lukos
Ogsuguon ku sikandan dio to mgo waro nigtuu kai to soin no kalibutan no unawa ian to nigsugu a nud kai to soin no kalibutan.
utong
doipag
Nig-unung din to kandin no salò. Inlagkos din to warò labot
Ka soini no in-anad ku, nigligkat to sikan no Maroyow no Nangnangonon no impatalipun to Magboboot kanak. Sikandin ka mabogbog no litos to ogsayoon ta.
Ian su kono a ogkasipod no ognangonnangon to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu, su agad hontow no ogtuu, ko Hudiu woy ka kono no Hudiu, ogkapangabangan sikandan oyow ogkaawo on ka iglogpad poron to salo dan. No ka sikan no pogpangabang, ogligkat to dakol no kabogbogan to Magboboot.
bantang
Ko si Hisus no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, ko nakaponga to ogkagi to mgo hibatoon din, nigbatun sikandin dio to langit no nigpinnuu dio to kawanan to Magboboot.
atag
pulus
lawang
No nakadoromdom ka sikan no datu to, ‘Ogmonuon ku naan ka soini no dakol no oggaanion ku uromo to waro litos no ogkasabukan ku?
No nighutuk nigkagi ka ogdinogon din to, “Kono nu oghingarani to maligsom ka piglinisan on to Magboboot.”
Ian su ka Pogsugu to Magboboot kanta, kono ogligkat to mgo kagi ro duon, di ogligkat to kabogbogan to Magboboot.
basa
lugman
tigtig
Si Elisabit alunggun ki Sakarias, maroyow no mgo otow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot su og-ay-ayaran dan ogtumana ka tibo no mgo balaod no insugu kandan.
Kohoy-u kaniu no mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy mgo Parisiu. Patuutuu ro ka pogtuu now to Magboboot. Ogkounawa kow ro to siminto dio to mgo lobonganan no napinturaan to maputi. Maroyow ko ogpitawon ta dio to libuwasan dan, di dio to solod dan noolin do no mgo bokog to mgo mammatoy ka nakasabuk woy mgo lawa no namolu.
tugku
To narogil ka busow, sikan ian ka igkoinuinu to tibo no mgo otow dio no nigkagi sikandan to, “Sikanami no mgo pinanganak ni Israil, kuntoon koy pad nakakita to ogkounawa to soini.”
Nig-inso si Hisus to “Pila buwa no malison no paan ka kai?” Nigtabak to, “Papitu no malison ka kai.”
Ogsayoon ku ka Magboboot no nigpaag-agaran to mgo kaap-apuan ku woy songo ogpaag-agaran ku to maawang do ka goinawa ku kandin. No agad maallow woy ko marusilom no og-ampu a, ogpakasayo a kandin ko malasi ku oghinampoti sikoykow.
Ko du-on batò no ogdaralu no ungod ogparigus, ogkagi ka mgo buyag to na-agpu-unan su nalimuan to gamowgamow.
Mohimulung ka layag to amag.
panubul
ombow
sapon
Ko du-on tanò no nasamò to woig no nigsamba, sikan ka napulù.
lindog
tibulasan
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, su dakol ka pogkohoy-u to Magboboot kanta, ogbuyu a kaniu to oyow igbogoy now ka lawa now dio to Magboboot to oyow ogpakatuman kow to ogkoiniatan din. Sikan ka igkatubad ta kandin no manokal ki pad. No og-awoson to waro solug no maroot to mgo hinimuan ta oyow igkarago din. Sikan ian ka litos no batasan ta ko ogsimboon ta ka Magboboot.
lagkos
indanan
Nò, ka sika mgo sundalu, tagkos to igbuyag dan, woy ka sikan no mgo talagbantoy to Dakol no Ampuanan, nigdakop dan si Hisus woy nigbanggutan dan sikandin,
saosow
Ka igbunbun to komos, ka uran.
Talamon si Buling
Og-ampuan ku sikandan kuntoon. Kono ku og-ampuan ka mgo otow kai to soin no kalibutan no waro nigtuu. Ian ku ro og-ampuan ka sikan no mgo otow no insalig nud koddi su koykow ka tagtuun kandan.
Piglimud ni Hirodis ka tibo no mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy mgo talag-anad to Balaod. To nalimudlimud on sikandan, nig-inso sikandin no nigkagi to, “Hondoi ianak ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan”
otì
Mgo sulod no igdakoli ku to goinawa, dakol ka igkoiniati ku to ogsulat kaniu tongod to pogpangabang ni Hisu Kristu to mgo salo tanow. Ian su og-awoson to og-atuan ta ka ig-anad to mgo otow no ogbalowbalow poron to soini no pogtuu ta no ian tahan no impohitaga kanta no kono man no litos to ogkabalowbalow.
langan
bogong
Di ka sikan no diwata to Magboboot, nig-inso kanak to, “Manio to ogbolongbolong ka? Ignangon ku koykow ka ingkoholos no kalitukan to sikan no boi woy ka magintalunan no og-alap kandin no duon papitu no mgo ulu woy sampulu no mgo sukat din.
lagak
solom
Ka otow no oglogsad to tanò, ko ogpakarongan to ogkutol ka limukon, konò ogto-od to ogpamano-ug to tanò ka otow.
Ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no nigduma ki Hisus ka nigtabak to, “Soini si Hisus no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no taga Nasarit no dio to Galilia.”
Ogpapitawon kow nikandin to dakol no sinabong no dio to ampow no tahan no impanagana to magaliug. Dio kow on ian oghimu to pagkoonan ta.”
Og-umalagon din ka pog-ampù din su oyow ogkaparagas ka ogdoromdoman din no maroyow.
Sikanta no ogtuu, ko oglimudlimud ki no ogdoromdom to kamatayon ni Kristu, ogpasalamatan ta ka og-inumon ta no woig to bogas to bunal no igmaganangon to naawo ka salo ta su ligkat to langosa rin. Woy songo ogpasalamatan ta ka paan no ogpanlotibon ta no ogkoonon ta no ian igmaganangon to nasagboka kinow on kandin ligkat to lawa rin no namatoy dio to krus.
Ka litukan to soin no kagi ni Hisus bahin to mgo bougan, sikan ka Gimukud to Magboboot no magaan no ogtinawo to mgo nigtuu kandin. Ko nigkagi si Hisus dio to sikan no Pagkoonan, wa pad bogayi ka mgo otow su wa pad mamatoy si Hisus no wa pad batuna dio to langit.
Ogsusu ka batò.
sipod
Ogpan-ogot to duma rin to konò ogpa-agad-agad.
Agad waro nigpangabang kanak di nigbuligan a to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta oyow ogpakanangonnangon a to tibo to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu oyow ogpakarinog on ka tibo no mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. No nigpangabangan to Magboboot no waro a matoori to oghimatoy.
Duon lukos dio to Hirusalim no ian ngaran din, si Simion. Ka soini no otow, maroyow ka mgo batasan din woy ogtahuron din ka Magboboot no ogtatagad sikandin ko kon-u ogpangabangi ka mgo otow no pinanganak ni Israil. No ka Gimukud to Magboboot, nigduma layun ki Simion no
ugpò
ma-awang
dungkù
Ko duon otow no nahan din no talagnangon sikandin to kagi no ogligkat to Magboboot, woy ko nahan din no duon kabogbogan din no ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot, og-awoson to ogtokoron din no sugu to Lagboy to Igbuyag ta ka soini no insulat ku kaniu.
piak
su kono ogbogayan ka mgo boi to ogkakagi ko ogkalimudlimud kow to og-ampu. Og-awoson to ogpamminog sikandan su sikan dod ka ingkasulat to dongan no Balaod to Magboboot.
komos
Sikandin ka ligkatan to kouyagan ta no nigligkat to nasagboka kinow on ki Hisu Kristu. No ka Magboboot dod ka nigboot to si Hisus ka ogligkatan to katouanan ta, woy to sikandin dod ka oghimu kanta no maroyow dio to tangkaan din. Woy sikandin ka ligkatan to ogkaayun on ka goinawa ta kandin su sikandin ka nigbalukas kanta no makasasalo.
Di ko lagboy ki ogsilag to duma ta woy ko ogbalagaron ta ro duon sikandin su ogkoiniatan tad to ogparakoldakol ki to ngaran ta, kono kid poron ogdayandayan no ogligkat to nahan ta no natou ki su og-awoson to oyow kono kid ogpakasalo to soini no tu-tuu ian no igkaanad noy no kinagian to Magboboot.
tirò
Nò,’ kagi to labow no igbuyag dan, ‘bahin to sikan no mgo usig ku no kono ogkoiniat to ogkohimu a no Labow no Igbuyag dan, angaya now on sikandan no himatayi now on sikandan kai to tangkaan ku.’ ”
Nò, to pogtabak to mgo lugung, ogsulat a poron to nigdinog ku. Di duon kagi no nigdinog ku ligkat to langit no nignangon to, “Iholos nud to koykow ro no goinawa ka innangon to mgo lugung. Kono nud isulat.”
Woy nangulibot si Pedro no nignangon to, “Agad oglogparan a to Magboboot ko ubat ka ignangon ku kaniu no waro ku tokora ka sikan no otow.” Nò, inogo on ian no nig-ukalo on ka manuk.
Dio to kanami, woy ogkatahuron noy ko noimu on no pogbuyagon.
kombong
No ka tibo no mgo otow no ogtuman to mgo sugu to Magboboot, ogpakarumaruma sikandan kandin. Songo ogdumaruma ka Magboboot kandan. No ian to nataga ki to songo ogdumaruma ka Magboboot kanta su ogligkat to Gimukud din no imbogoy rin kanta.
Kagi ni Hisus ki Simon Pedro to, “Simon, pamminog ka. Si Satanas, noiniatan kow nikandin su og-ol-ologan kow oyow ogkitoon din ko maagkap do ka pogtuu now no ogkounawa ro to otapon to homoy no ogkaalap to kalamag.
bangan
karuga
hilu
Suruy kow pad to duma ta
to-od
Lapis sikan
Ko layun kow ogpamogas, ogkasayo ka Amoy ku pinabayo to dakol ka bogas now no ogkatokod to hibatoon ku sikaniu.”
Di nigtabak si Abraham kandin to, ‘Ka kagi to Magboboot no ingkasulat ni Moisis woy to duma to mgo dongan no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, duon dod dio to kandan. Sikan ka litos no ogpamminogon dan.’
sumpalit
No ka dangob no tuud to inhondio on woy si Maria su ogpohimatayan dan ka darua no limukon. Ko waro limukon, agad darua no salapati su sikan ian ka kagi dut Balaod to Magboboot dongan no litos to ogtubaran dan.
poros
Doromdoma now ka kalitukan to kinagian to Magboboot no nigkagi to, ‘Kono no ogkoiniatan ku ka igtubad now di ka ogkoiniatan ku ian to ogkohoy-uan now ka mgo duma now.’ ” Nigkagi man do si Hisus to, “Wara a nighondini to ogbulig to mgo otow no matuwarong so batasan dan ko kono ku ogbuligan ka mgo makasasalo oyow ogbalbalawan dan ka batasan dan.”
so-ut
Nabolongbolong ka mgo otow no nigmakagkagioy on to, “Nokoy naan buwa ka soini no pogsugu din no duon kabogbogan? Omunaan ko ogkagian ni Hisus ka mgo busow ogpakaawo do su dakol ka katondanan din woy ka kabogbogan din,” kagi to mgo otow.
To nigdinog to mgo Parisiu ka tibo soini no innangon ni Hisus pigsumpalit dan si Hisus su ogkannugunan dan ka salapi dan.
Ko kò koy ogkohikotan to mgo igbaybayari..
Nigparagas ka mgo hibatoon din dio to lunsud oyow ogbolion dan ka ogkoonon dan. Ko dio dod ka mgo hibatoon din, nokouma ka songo matig Samaria no boi no ogsakaru dio to balun. Kagi ni Hisus kandin, “Og-inum a kun.”
Ko kulang ka langosa ta, ogkatabolog ki ko oghipanow no konò ki ogpoko-orol.
No ka Magboboot, ian ogbogoy to boni to mgo ogman-oorok woy songo ogbogoy to ogkakoon ta. No sikandin dod ka ogbogoy to dakol no igkabulig din kanta oyow songo ogkatimulan ka igkohoy-u ta to duma ta. No ian ogkounawa to ogtimulan din ka igpamula ta no boni oyow dakoldakol ka ogkagaani ta to maroyow no batasan.
Nigkoon to mgo minuna now ka paan no oghingaranan to mana ko dio sikandan to holholawan. Di namatoy rod sikandan.
dansu
Nò, oggutasan on si Pedro no ogkoiniat porom no ogkoon. Di tagood to ogsusugba pad ka duma rin, duon impapitow to Magboboot kandin.
Ka soini otow no igpahatod ku dio to koykow, narakop to mgo Hudiu. No ko waro ku pa poron moumoi sikandin, oghimatayan dan on poron. Duon mgo sundalu no nigduma kanak no nigpapangabangan ku si Pablo su nanangonan a to nasakup sikandin to gobirnu ta no dio to Ruma.
No niglapognat to pogsasindog din woy nokohihipanow on. No nigduma on woy ki Pedro to ogsolod to sikan no Dakol no Ampuanan. Songo kuwo no oghihipanow sikandin woy songo kuwo no ogpakasayowsayow on no ungod din sayaa ka Magboboot.
Nig-inso ni Hisus to, “Nokoy ka Balaod no imbogoy ni Moisis dongan?”
Woy nigtokod to sikan ian ka otow no napulid no ungod do duon ogpakapinpinuu dio to Maroyow no Gumawan no ogbuyu to salapi, dio to dakol no Ampuanan dan. Nabolongbolong on lagboy sikandan to noulian on ka sikan no napulid.
halukip
No nakadoromdom a to kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus to, ‘Woig ka imbautismu ni Huan to mgo otow, di waro do malugoy no ka Gimukud to Magboboot ka igbautismu kaniu.’
taklubu
Di ian ku ignangon to sulat ku to og-awoson to kono ki ogdumaruma to otow no nigtuu kun ki Hisus di oghimu to maroot to kono no asawa rin woy ko oggogolgol sikandin to kalaglagan, woy ko og-ampu to mgo inotow-otow woy ko oglanglangitan din ka duma rin woy ko oglasinglasing woy ko ogpanakow. Nò agad ko ogkoon, kono ki ogdumaruma to sikan no otow.
Ka mgo uripon, nangoni nu to oyow ogpaagad-agad sikandan to tagtuun kandan, no agad nokoy ka igpohimu kandan, og-awoson no ogmaroyawon dan to oghimu oyow ogkarago ka tagtuun kandan to tibo no oghimuon dan. Og-awoson to kono dan og-atuan ka nokouyamu kandan,
gamut
Nò, kagi ni Satanas, “Ka tibo to soini no ogkakitaan nu, igbogoy ku koykow di woy ku ro igbogoy ko ogsimboon a nu.”
Ogtondokon ta ka ogkutol.
Iglobong diò to tanò to daruwa no allow ka pogbatuk to sikan no agkud.
Nò, pogdinog to mgo otow to innangonnangon ni Hirodis, pigpaagbotan dan to pogsayo dan to, “Kono no kagi ro duon to otow ka soini ko kono no magboboot nanaan ka ogkagi kanami.”
bagkolong
gantung
Soini ka mgo ngaran to sika mgo nig-alam ni Hisus: si Simon no nighingaranan ni Hisus ki Pedro;
Anara now ka mgo otow oyow ogpaagad-agad sikandan to tibo no insugu ku kaniu. Woy kono now kalingawi no allow allow no ungod a ogdumaruma kaniu, agad taman to poglibong ku.”
Dokad di su dakol so goinawa ku koykow, igbuyu ku ro duon. No agad to sikanak, no si Pablo, suguonon a ni Hisu Kristu, no kuntoon, napirisu a su ligkat to pogtuman ku kandin.
Songo nigduma ka pila buwa no mgo boi. Nokani, duon duma no narogilan ka busow dio to lawa ran woy ka duma no nabawian to dalu ran. Ka mgo nigduma, duon si Maria Magdalina, no papitu no busow ka narogil to kandin no lawa,
sulat
Ka ilaw no gaas dò ka gamit, maga-an ogkaparong to kalamag.
Pogkaponga to sikan, nigbuyu ka mgo otow ko duon ka ogkohimu no labow no igbuyag dan. No si Saulo no anak ni Kis woy pinanganak ni Binhamin, ian on ka pighimu to Magboboot no labow no igbuyag to ugpaan dan,” kagi ni Pablo. “No ka pog–alap din to pandatuan din, nataman on ka kohop–atan on no tuid.
sadsad
No ian ku ro ogkoiniatan kuntoon to oyow ogkatagam a ki Hisu Kristu woy to oyow ogbogayan a to kabogbogan to Magboboot no ian ingkouyag ki Hisu Kristu ligkat to kamatayon din. Woy songo ogkoiniatan ku to oyow ogkaaguanta ku poron ka igkabaybayari ku tongod to pogtuu ku ki Hisus no ian ogkounawa ko ogpakalagkos a to kandin no mgo igkabaybayari to oyow ogpokounug a kandin to pogkamatoy rin dio to krus.
Nakasuwoy sikandan to matul-id no dalan. No ian dan og-unugon ka maroot no batasan ni Balaam no anak ni Busur dongan no noiniat to salapi no igkabogoy poron kandin ko ogtumanon din ka maroot no igpohimu poron kandin.
“Ko duon goinawa now koddi,” kagi ni Hisus, “ogtumanon now ka mgo insugu ku kaniu.
logon
Ko hondo-i ka an-anayan no palì, du-on dò ian ig-ulit to ogpilak.
Hoo su og-aguantoon now ro ko og-uriponon kow nikandan woy ko ogpaginpulus sikandan no ogpurut to kalaglagan now, woy ko oglomotan kow ran. Agad ko ogtagpian dan pad ka langlanguwan now, og-aguantoon now rod.
balisò
lawig
tulab
Sikan ian ka pananglitan ni Hisus kandan. Di waro makasabut sikandan to kalitukan.
Ko du-on otow no ogkagi, konad ogkaparasan no ogkagi ko ogbunbunan to songo otow ka ogkagi. Ian ka og-ampow to kandin no kagi.
To nokouma on, kagi ran ki Hisus to, “Nangoni koy ko sikoykow ian ka innangon ni Huan no ogpokouma kai to kalibutan, woy ko duon pad dangob no ogtagaran noy?”
singyas
na-an
panguloì
Sikaniu no nabuhi pad kuntoon, maroot lagboy ka mgo batasan now woy waro goinawa now to Magboboot.” Kagi man do ni Hisus to, “Manio to ogkoiniatan now to ogpitow to indanan ko malogot ian to duon kabogbogan ku puun to Magboboot? Ka indanan do no igpapitow ku kaniu, ian do indanan no ogkounawa ro to noumaan dongan ki Hunas.” Nò, nighipanow on si Hisus.
Kaso-ong to magaliug din
Sikaniu, mgo sulod, maroyow man poron ka binunsuran to pog-unug now ki Hisus. No hontow man ka nigpasuwoy kaniu to nighagtong kow on to sikan no pog-unug now to tu-tuu ian no ingkaanad kaniu?
basal
“Nò, nigbabansagon no nig-umow ka datu kuwo ki Abraham to, ‘Wow, Apu Abraham, kohoy-ui a nu ro. Sugua nu bag si Lasaru to oyow igtinduk din bag ka tinuru din duon to woig woy oghondini pa koddi oyow igpatuu kai to dilo ku oyow og-aguanta a su lagboy a ian ogkasakitan kai to soin no hapuy.’
Woy natagaan ta to si Hisus ka nighondii to tano no sikandin dod ka nighondio to liu pad to langit oyow ogkatibulus on dio to kandin ka tibo no katondanan no dio to Langit woy kai to tano.
Ligkat to nasagboka kinow on ki Kristu, sikanami no Hudiu woy sikaniu no kono no Hudiu, nakarani kinow on to Amoy ta no ian Magboboot. No ian su sagboka ro ian ka Gimukud to Magboboot ka og-alagad kanta dio to tangkaan din.
tugtug
dolag
nanoy
Nò, nig-onow on woy nigparagas nigsasindog ka sikan no kono oggoram to lawa rin duon to tangkaan to sikan no mohon-ing no mgo otow. Nò, nigpurut din on ka hibatanan din woy nig-uli on sikandin. No duon to poghipanow rin nokouwang din on ka pogsayo din to Magboboot.
tombil
Ka asawa to anak ku no boi, maka-amung ku.
Ka diò to bubungan, ogsampit to amò ka ig-umow to amoy.
Ko hayod, ogpandayagang ka inoy.
Nò, ko ogkasasow kow to soini,” kagi ni Hisus, “ko pananglitan, koddi no Kakoy to koot-otawan, ko ogkitoon a now on no ogbatunon ad dio to ogligkatan ku, nokoy pad buwa ka sumansuman now?
Nakasabol ad su nakabayò a to kamulaan.
Allow, allow,” kagi rin, “nig-anad a kaniu dio to Dakol no Ampuanan no wara a now dakopa. Di ogkaayun soini oyow ogkatuman do ka impasulat to Magboboot dongan.”
Duon hari ni Marta no si Maria. Nigpinpinnuu si Maria marani ki Hisus su ogpamminog to ig-anad din.
Di ogparumoon porom ni Birnabi si Huan no oghingaranan ki Markos.
alimotow
Pananglitan, og-awoson to oghiponuon now ka tano no niglusob-ong no ogtoparon on ka mgo matikang no bubungan woy ka malopot no bubungan. Ogkatul-id on ka mgo dalan no ogkaliku-liku no ogkatapid on ka mgo dalan no nanggaalgaal.
bagulbagul
Unoy-unoy ka pan-alam.
Intuon nu kanak ka dalan no ogpakabogoy to kouyagan no waro katamanan. Narago–dago ka goinawa ku su duon ka kai to kanak.’ ”
Songo allow nigduma to mgo otow ka mgo bato dio ki Hisus oyow igpasamsaman dan kandin no og-ampuan din sikandan. Di nigsaparan to mgo hibatoon din ka mgo nigduma to bato.
Kagi ni Hisus kuwo ki Pedro, “Malogot ian ka soin no ogkagion ku koykow to kono pad og-ukalo to igkararua ka manuk to soin no marusilom no katatolu kad ogligal to wa ka mokotokod koddi.”
tularong
Di nigtabak ka Magboboot kandin to, “Duon dod papitu no malan no mgo otow no waro nigluhud no ogsimba to inotow no oghingaranan ki Baal no nahan dan no magboboot di kono.” Sikan ka innangon to Magboboot ki Ilias.
libuson
Dokad di, duon dakol no katouanan no igpasabut ku to mgo otow no masalig ka pogtuu ran. Di ka sikan no katouanan, loin to sikan no katouanan no ogligkat to soini no kalibutan, woy songo kono ogligkat to sikan no mgo otow no og-alap-alap to katondanan to soini no kalibutan. Di ogkaawo do ka sikan no katouanan.
Woy nigtabak si Hisus ki Pedro to, “Malogot ian ka kagi ku koykow no kono pad og-ukalo ka manuk to ogkapawo on no katatolu kad on ian no ogligal no ogtokoron anu.”
kogò
kita
li-us
Soini ka igtabak ku. Agad nokoy ka oghimuon ta, ko og-inum ki woy ko ogkoon ki, og-awoson to ian ta ro oghimuon to oyow ogkasayo ta ka Magboboot to tibo.
apunggoy
subalì
Konò ki ogsuloysuloy to pogtalabau ta.
Nò, nigpamitawan ni Pilipi si Natanial. Ko nigkita rin nignangonan din no kagi rin, “Nakitaan noy si Hisus no taga Nasarit no anak ni Husi. Sikandin ian ka duon to sulat ni Moisis duon to Balaod ta. Woy sikandin ian ka insulat to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot.”
Nangoni now si Arkipu to, “Ay-ayara nu tumana ka impohimu koykow to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta su suguanon ka to Magboboot.
bakbak
Ko oggoram ki to lobag no warò pad nigbugsi, ogmasakit ka logoylogoy ta kai to la-ang.
sakad
bagtos
bawì
hagamhagam
Ka bayokbok diò to dagat, ogpanginitkinit.
Konò ogka-ayun ko ogka-ag-ag ka nasubid su ogdokot.
No duon nigdinog ku no lagong no nigligkat dio to langit no ogkounawa kaagbot to pogdaragunut to dakol no sampow woy ogkounawa rod to pogdagsang no lugung woy songo ogkounawa to mohon-ing no mgo otow no ogkokolit to ogparagingon no oghingaranan to alpa.
irob
Ogkohoy-u kaniu no mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy mgo Parisiu. Patuutuu ro ka pogtuu now to Magboboot. Oggawayan now ro ka mgo nabalu no mgo boi oyow ogkuon now ka igkouyagi ran mgo baloy ran. Songo ogmalayaton now ka pog-ampu now oyow ogkoholos ka hinimuan now no mgo maroot. Ligkat to soin, dakol lagboy ka iglogpad kaniu to Magboboot.
tagalò
An-anayan, wa mogpangabang ka sika talagboot to balu, di pogkalugoy no ungod niglibonglibong ka nabalu, kagi to goinawa to sika talagboot to, ‘Agad naan to waro igtahud ku to Magboboot woy songo waro igtahud ku to mgo otow,
No ka igkamaroyow now to lawa now, og-awoson to kono ogligkat to ogsubla no poghimhimasad to bulbul now woy ko og-ilis kow to mahal no manggad woy ko bulawan.
Duon mgo otow uromo no ogkagi kaniu bahin to Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan to, ‘Sooyad on sikandin,’ woy ko kagi to duma to, ‘Soinid on to kanami.’ Di kono kow oghondio woy kono now iparuma ka goinawa now kandan,
Ka mgo otow no bagani, moon-ing ka namatoy rin no mgo otow.
pokas
kalo-kalo
Di kuntoon, oyow konad ogparagas sikandan no ognangonnangon, ogbohogon ta woy ogsaparan tad sikandan to, ‘Bunsud kuntoon, kono now on ignangonnangon ka nangnangonon tongod to ngaran ni Hisus.”
pilit
duma
Duon mgo otow no duma ta to pogtuu ki Hisu Kristu no nigdatong kai to kanami. No dakol ka ingkarago ku su nignangonan koy ran to og-ay-ayaran nu oggongoni ka tu-tuu no nangnangonon woy og-unug on ian ka batasan nu to sikan ian no tu-tuu no nangnangonon.
goinawa
Mgo sulod, maroyow ko manalingboka ta ro ka og-abin to katondanan to og-anad to mgo ogtuu su nataga kow to sikanami no mgo talag-anad no duon katondanan noy, dakoldakol ka iglogpad kanami to Magboboot ko ogpakasuwoy koy to tu-tuu ian no pog-anad.
Tagtago-od kad.
Ka innangon ni Isaias no talagnangon dongan to Magboboot natuman to soini no mgo otow. Innangon dongan ni Isaias to, ‘Ungod sikandan ogpaminog, di kono sikandan ogpakasabut. Songo ungod sikandan ogpitow di kono sikandan ogpakamolmolog.
uwang
silò
olad
sula
Wà dod.
Sikan ian to nigduma si Hisus kandan. To marani on to baloy to kapitan, duon mgo karumaan to sikan no kapitan no pinatagbu rin ki Hisus no kagi ran kandin to, “Buyag,” kagi to kapitan, “balagad ko kono kad ogparagas dio to baloy ku su ogkasipod a to kono a ogpakasokod koykow Hisus, su molintok do ka koddi no katondanan.
Ogbuyu a to Amoy tanow no ka Magboboot woy si Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta oyow ogkohoy-uan kow woy to ogkabogayan kow ran to maawang no pog-ugpo now.
No, insabuk to Gimukud to Magboboot dut goinawa ni Simion to ogsolod to Dakol no Ampuanan. Songo nokouma on si Husi alunggun ki Maria dio to Ampuanan no pig-alap dan ka bato su ogtumanon dan ki Hisus ka batasan no ingkasulat dio to Balaod dan.
Ka mgo dalaga no malopot so pogdoromdom dan, wa dan alapa ka litos no lana no panagana ko ogkoubus on ka lana to mgo ilawan dan.
tugun
Pogdinog to mgo igbuyag to talagpanubad, narago sikandan no innangon dan si Hudas to ogbogayan dan sikandin to salapi. Nò, nigbunsud namitow si Hudas to litos no oghimuon din oyow ogpanabod din ki Hisus.
kai
banoy2
Di ognangonan ku sikaniu no nokouma on si Elias di waro tokora to mgo otow. Nigbaybayaran dan sikandin woy nighimu ran ka ogkoiniatan dan no oghimu dio to kandin. No sikoddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan, songo ogbaybayaran a ogkounawa to nighimu ran kandin.”
No,” kagi rod to sikan no mgo talagbaligya to, “Ka tibo no ogkoiniatan nu poron, warad on. Woy ka tibo no karoyawan nu, songo konad on ogkakitaan. Ian ka kagi ran.
uroik
Sikan ian to dakol ka ingkarago to mgo otow dio to sikan no ugpaan.
walas
tulis
Duon ingkasulat ni Moisis dongan tongod to mgo otow no ogkohimu on poron no maroyow no ogligkat to pogtuman dan poron to Balaod no ingkasulat din dongan. Kagi rin to, “Ka otow no ogtumanon tiboon ka Balaod no ingkasulat dongan, ogkabogayan to kouyagan no waro katamanan.”
Ian su duon dangob no kinagian to Magboboot no igpasabut kanta to malomu ro ko ogtuu kinow to kagi rin su kagi rin to, “Ka kinagian to Magboboot, duon on to bo-bo now woy kaid on to doromdom now.” No ka sikan no kinagian to Magboboot tongod to pogtuu ta ki Hisus, sikan ian ka innangonnangon noy to mgo otow.
kupas
ikug
supò
Soini ka impohitaga to Magboboot kanta to dakol ian ka goinawa rin kanta, su nigsugu din ka bugtung no Anak din kai to soini no kalibutan oyow ogkabogayan ki to kouyagan no ogligkat to nighimu ni Hisus kanta.
No, duon dod songo boi no nabalu no ka ngaran din, si Ana no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot sikandin. Ian ngaran to amoy rin si Panuil no ka kaap-apuan din, si Asir. Woy nabalu si Ana to papitu pad no tuid to pog-aalunggun dan. Kuntoon, buyag on ian no kawaluan on ka tuid din woy hop-at. Waro moghutuk mog-asawa sikandin no malasi nighondio to Dakol no Ampuanan allow woy karusilom no ogsimboon din ka Magboboot to pog-ampu din woy to poglangkad din no ogkoon.
Nighun-a ni Boyboy so-ini pamulingan to kò ki ogko-ibog to kanta no ko-onon.
domhug
Kagi to amoy ku, "Pa-andalan nu ka koykow su oghun-a a woy ikul ka koddì ko hondo-i a ogbayò."
Pogkaponga, pinalibuwas on to igbuyag to mgo sundalu ka balubato no pigsaparan din sikandin to, “Kono nu nangoni ka agad hontow to nignangonan a nu to soini.”
Insabal din ka lawa rin dio to iam no lobonganan no pilang din. Iam din lungagi dio to dalama no batu. Naponga, in-atang din ka dakol no batu no inliid din to bo-bo to pilang woy nighipanow on sikandin.
hikot
Nò, impabiidbiid to busow ka sika lukos no nigngangang to maagbot no niglibuwas on.
Waro malugoy no duon sagboka no boi no binulan no nigkita ki Pedro no nigtongtongan din sikandin no kagi rin, “Ka soini no lukos, songo nigduma ki Hisus.”
su agad ogkitoon din pad ka langlanguwan din di mangkuwan ko oghipanow on, ogkalingawan din on ko moomonu ka pogpitow rin to sikan no alung din.
Tulu-i a to’gbibinayu.
parong
Ko duon agad hontow no oghisakit poron kandan, duon hapuy no oglibuwas to bo-bo dan no ogkatutung ka mgo usig dan no ogkoubus sikandan no ogkamatoy.
Ka kalusaput, ogtongos to langitlangit. No ka langitlangit, ogtongos to bunow.
Nò, ogkatokawan sikandin to pog-uli to igbuyag din.
No ligkat to sikan, ogpakasabut ki to, ka pog-abin to Magboboot to sakup din, kono ogligkat to boot to otow, woy songo kono ogligkat to pogpoomot to mgo otow to oghimu to maroyow di ogligkat do atag to pogkohoy-u to Magboboot.
Kono kow ogpohingaran to Maistru su patalasulod kow tibo no, sagboka ro ian ka Maistru now.
Ko du-on ogkito-on to asu no ambow, ogpamu-oron din
Ko niglituratu koy ki Jim no pogkaponga, nigbogayan koy to alung noy.
Nigkagi to “Malinis ka tibo; ka sagboka ro ka kono no malinis” su natagaan din tahan ko hontow ka ogtabod kandin.
tinok
antabon
Ka boni no nakasawod to dalan, ian ogkounawaan ka mgo otow no nigdinog to kagi to Magboboot, di to ogdatong on ka igbuyag to mgo busow no og-awoon din on ka kagi to Magboboot no nakatagu to goinawa ran oyow kono dan ogtuu woy to oyow kono dan ogkalipuas to salo dan.”
Ogtugbung on ka pakpak
Nabolongbolong ka sikan no matig Samaria no boi no nigtabak din to, “Nokoy soini! Hudiu ka woy matig Samaria a no boi no ogbuyuan a nu to woig.” Sikan ian ka kagi rin. Kono ogpakag-alkuy ka mgo Hudiu to mgo matig Samaria.
Ka baloy ko ian dò bintanà, ispiu, mo-ilag dò su ogkito-on ta rò ka limang su ma-awang ka pogpitow ta.
Lagboy no igkarago to mgo otow ka kamatayon to sikan no daruwa. No oghimu sikandan to ogkaragaan woy ogmabogbogayoy to mgo igkarago no mgo kalaglagan su namatoy ka sikan no daruwa no nakabayadbayad to sikan no mgo otow no og-ugpo kai to soini no tano.
Ungod ki ro og-ampu to Magboboot.
Nigtabak kandin no wa din holosi sikandan. Kagi rin, “Kono no sikoddi ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan.”
gulabung
Nigparagas no nigkagi si Hisus to, “Songo nigdinog now ka in-anad dongan to kaap-apuan tanow to ogdakolon ta ka goinawa ta to mgo duma ta woy marooton ta ka goinawa ta to mgo usig ta.”
Woy ka mgo otow no nasoloran to busow, ko nigkita ran si Hisus, nigluhud duon to tangkaan din no nigbabansagon to, “Sikoykow ka Anak to Magboboot.”
ugpa-an
pa-a
bonnal
lupì
Takas sikan, du-on ogpati-ulug dii to tangka-an ta
songkukù
kolid
Soini ka tuud to ogbobootan. Nighondini to soin no kalibutan ka Igbat-ow to pogdoromdom to mgo otow. Di kono ogkoiniat ka mgo otow to soin no igbat-ow su konon gustu ran to ogkabat-awan ka sumsumanan dan su maroot man ka oghimuon dan.
utayugà
Uauyi’n ka batò; kabigtawan.
Duon inso dan ki Hisus no kagi ran to, “Maistru, duon nigsulat ni Moisis kanta dongan no sugu no kagi rin kanta, ko ogkamatoy ka lukos, no nabalu on ka boi di waro pad anak dan, ian do kun ogpakaliwan no og-asawa to nabalu ka ipag din. Ogkohimu soini oyow ko og-anak on ka boi, oghingaranan ka sika anak din to ngaran to lukos no namatoy.
lugung
bugsong
Di nataga kow ko nokoy ka ogpakaatang to poglopow to sikan no talaglop-ang to Balaod. Ian su og-awoson to, woy ro ogkatagaan sikandin, ko ogpokouma on ka allow no noindanan kandin.
Ko ogko-iling ki Emuel, su Ariola on sikandan, igkarangob on no sulod.
Konò ogtangkò su dakol ka ogtalabawon din woy ogpalpalaguy sikandin.
Nigduma ran si Hisus to sikan tano no oghingaranan to Golgota, no ian kalitukan, “Bokog to Ulu.”
Pogdinog to mgo nigtuu no dio to Ruma to ogpokouma koy on, nigtagbu kanami dio to Palingki ni Apiu. Ka duma dan, dio nigtagbu kanami to lunsud no ogngaranan dan to Tatolu no Datonganan. Pogkita ni Pablo kandan, pigpasalamatan din ka Magboboot woy nigmaroyow on ka goinawa rin.
pogkot
Ko diò to Kapugi, ka woig, ogduhu. Ko tongod to kayu no ogliwan to doun, ogdulu.
bayung
Agad hontow otawa no nig-ongkod to ugpaan din, woy ko mgo hari mgo kakoy rin, ko amoy ko inoy rin, ko mgo anak din, woy ko tano din oyow og-unugon a rin, ogkabogayan sikandin to Magboboot to dakoldakol to an-anayan no in-ongkod din woy songo ogkabogayan sikandin to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
Ian su ka innangon to sikan no mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, waro nigligkat to doromdom to mgo otow di nigligkat atag to Gimukud to Magboboot ko nokoy ka igpanangon to Magboboot.
Nò, nigkagi ran to, “Ka soin no otow, si Hisus, anak ni Husi. Nataga ki man ko hontow ka amoy rin, mgo inoy rin. Ko sikan naan, manio buwa to ignangon din to nigligkat dio to langit?”
Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus. “Waro oripon no labow to igbuyag din woy waro suguanon no labow to sika nigsugu kandin.
Nò, nighipanow on ka sikan no anak to datu no nigparagas no nig-uli on dio to amoy rin. “Di to mariu pad to baloy to amoy rin, nigkita ka amoy rin kandin dio to dalan. Nohoy-u lagboy ka amoy rin kandin, dayun to nigpallaguy woy nigdalapak ka amoy rin. Pogkouma to amoy kandin, nigkopkopan din sikandin woy pigharokan to amoy rin.
Ko du-on ogkulasan ta, og-anamon ta ko du-on otow, sikan ka ogpansobon to du-on mangayow no oggogopù, ogkagi ki to "rrrrr".
dagsò
Di ka sikan no bailan, no songo oghingaranan ki Ilimas su ian ka igkalituk to bailan to Ginirigu, nig–atu to sikan no ignangonnangon woy ni Saulo su og-atangan din poron oyow kono ogtuu si Sirgio Paulo ki Hisu Kristu.
si-ot
higkil
kalabow
Nigbus-ugan ka lawa ku to lana to sikan no boi oyow igpanagana koddi to allow to igsabal on ka lawa ku.
ay-ayaman
alimbual
Di ko ogpuun to otow ka igtabak ta, ay, angkuwan kanta!” Kono dan porom ogtabak to ogpuun to otow su nahallok to mgo otow su nigtuu sikandan to malogot si Huan no talagnangon to kagi no nigpuun to Magboboot.
Woy duon dod nigdinog dan no maagbot lagboy no daging no ogkounawa to bungag, woy songo nigdinog dan ka kinagian to Magboboot. Pogdinog dan to sikan no kagi, nigpohoy-uhoy-u to oghagtong on sikandin no ogkagi.
Nò, su nigtuman on ni Hisu Kristu ka sikan noiniatan to Magboboot, naawo on ka mgo salo ta woy naayun on ka goinawa ta dio to Magboboot su ligkat to lawa ni Hisu Kristu no ingkatubad din to sikan no sagboka ro no namatoy no igliwan kanta. No kono og-awoson no ogkohutuk.
tabolog
Songo dio si Huan no Talagbautismu to Inon no lunsud no marani to Salim no lunsud. Songo rio nigbautismu sikandin su dakol ka woig dio. Nò, nighondio ki Huan ka mgo otow oyow ogpabautismu sikandan.
Nighutuk niglibuwas si Pilatu to libuwasan to tangkaan to mgo Hudiu. Kagi rin kuwo kandan to, “Pitow kow, ogpalibuwason ku dii to tangkaan now si Hisus oyow ogkataga kow to waro ku matagoi ka salo din agad sagboka.”
Ka sikan no lunsud, oglayag no ogligkat to Magboboot. No ian ogkounawaan ka mahal no batu no marulag tad ogkitoon no ogkohingaranan to haspir no ogmating-ow no ogkoiling to lamita.
Nò mgo sulod, pig-alam kow to Magboboot woy nohimu kow on no mgo sakup din su dakol ka goinawa rin kanta. Sikan ian no og-awoson no oghalinon ta ka mgo batasan ta to maroyow. Ogkohoy-uan ta ka duma ta woy kono kid ogparakoldakol. Og-awoson to oyow ogmoungangon ki woy kono kid magaan ogkabolu to duma ta.
Warad on sikandin kai, su nootawan on, unawa to innangon din kaniu nokani. Hondini kow; pitawa now ka nohibatan din.”
timpuruk
Di agad naan, niglangob a nignangonnangon kaniu kai to soini no sulat to pila buwa no igkanangon ku oyow kono now ogkalingawi. No ian su nohoy-uan a to Magboboot
No kagi ran to, “Si Pablo, ogpahalinon din on poron ka mgo batasan to pogsimba ta to Magboboot. Di ka sikan no ig–anad din, ogpaka-atu to mgo Balaod noy,” kagi to mgo Hudiu.
Ko ogbabalun ki diò to pantad, ogsabukan to bayokbok oyow ogkasalà ka mgo lagut.
ulu
Nigparagas nighipanow si Hisus di wa din dumaa ka mgo otow. Si Pedro si Santiago, woy si Huan no hari ni Santiago do ka nigduma rin.
Di og-awoson to ian ogpakamaroyow kaniu ka maroyow no batasan no ogligkat to goinawa no maawang unawa to mohimulung no kagi now woy ogligkat dod to ogmoungangon kow. Sikan ian ka lagboy no igkaroyow kaniu no mgo boi no kono atag ogkaawo. No to tangkaan to Magboboot, sikan ian no batasan ka duon dakol no pulus.
Ko oglimudlimud ki to og-ampu, ko duon lukos no og-ampu woy ko ognangon to kagi no ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot, ko ogtorongan din ka ulu rin, ogpakasipod ki Hisus no ian Igbuyag din.
ngulug
balatik
luit
Ka ubal, ko og-ogot to otow, ogkakatal on ka oglunggaton din ka nig-ugpa-an din.
Sikan ian no og-awoson to ungod ki ogpoomot to oyow ogpakasolod ki to sikan no himolayan to Magboboot. No og-ayad-ayad ki to oyow waro agad sagboka kanta no ogpokoiling to sikan no mgo otow no waro nigpaagad-agad no waro makatood no ogsolod.
Di atag, ko duon ki no oglimudlimud no og-ampu, madmaroyow ku ko ogpakakagi a to agad lalimma ro no kinagian no ogkasabutan oyow ogkaanad ku ka mgo otow. Madmaroyow porom ka sikan ko duon pa sampulu no malan no kagi to sikan no loinloin no mgo kinagian no kono ogkasabutan.
tu-id
Pogkaponga, niglibong do woy si Husi no inlogsad dan on ka lawa ni Hisus woy nigbukusan dan on ka lawa rin to maroyow no maputi no manggad. Pogkaponga rin, nig-alap din on ka lawa ni Hisus no dio din isabal to sabalan no nalungagan dio to ilis to dalama. Ka sikan no sabalanan, waro pad matagoi to namatoy.
Nò, nouli ka goinawa to bato no nig-onow on nigparagas no nigsasindog sikandin. No innangon ni Hisus kandan to ogpakoonon ka bato.
gubat
iam
Di nignangonan ni Pablo ka kapitan woy ka mgo sundalu to, “Ko kono og–ugpo ka sikan no mgo talagtimun kai to barku, warad ogkohimu now su tibo kow ogkamatoy.”
No sikan dod ian ka im–imanan to mgo duma ku no mgo Hudiu no ian pinanganak to sikan no sampulu woy daruwa no kaap–apuan noy. Sikan ian to maallow woy ko marusilom, ogpoomot ka mgo Hudiu to pogsimba ran to Magboboot. Nò, Buyag, ka soini no im–imanan noy, ian ka ligkatan to nigbabayungan a to mgo Hudiu.
butaku
Sikandin no ogligkat dio to Magboboot, ogpamminog atag to kagi to Magboboot. Sikaniu atag, waro kow mogligkat dio to Magboboot no ian kono kow ogpamminog kandin.”
Og-a-agum si Buntit to liang no ogpabantayon din ka og-anaron din.
Ka soini no igsulat ku, insalig to Magboboot ki Hisu Kristu no igpohitaga rin dio to mgo suguanon din oyow ogkatagaan dan ka ogkoumaan no konad on ogkalugoy. No nigsugu din ka diwata no suguanon din, no ian impohitaga kanak no si Huan.
di waro dan makatood to oghimuon dan poron su tibo no mgo otow nig-ayad-ayad nigpamminog to kagi ni Hisus.
Di, kuntoon to nokouli on si Timoteo ligkat to kaniu, nighitaga koy rin to maroyow tongod kaniu to manokal ka pogtuu now ki Hisus woy to dakol ka goinawa now to mgo otow. Woy innangon din to maroyow ungod ka goinawa now kanami no songo duon igkoiniat now no ogkita kanami no ogkounawa karakol to pogkoiniat noy no ogkita kaniu.
Nò to kai pad si Hisus to soini no tano, nigpaagbotan din to nig-uwang to goinawa rin woy nigsinogow ka nig-ampu dio to Magboboot su ka Magboboot doka duon kabogbogan no litos to ogpangabang porom kandin oyow kono ogkamatoy. No nigpamminog ka Magboboot ki Hisus su dakol ka pogtahud ni Hisus kandin.
No nigkagian din ka sikan no igkohon-om no diwata no duon bungag to, “Hokari nu ka imbanggut to sikan no hop-at no mgo diwata ni Satanas no nigbanggutan dio to dakol no woig no ogkohingaranan to Eupratis.”
Woy og-anaron dan dod sikandan oyow songo ogmaroyow ka goinawa ran no kono oghimu to maroot, woy to oyow maroyow ka pogtuman dan to talabau ran. Og-awoson to makolkohoy-u sikandan woy to oyow ogpaag-agaran dan ka mgo asawa ran. Ian su og-awoson to kono ogmarooton to mgo otow ka nangnangonon to Magboboot.
Mohon–ing ka nigduwad dan no kalaglagan dan woy ko tano dan. No nigtalaran dan ka mgo duma ran no duon og–awoson dan.
Kagi to mgo hibatoon din kandin to, “Pitow ka. Mohon-ing ka mgo otow no nokog-akob-akob no marani dio to koykow. Manio naan to og-inso ka to, ‘Hontow ka nigsamsam to kinabo ku?’ ”
bakolow
iras
Ka talaghimu to kuron ka ogboot ko ogmonuon din ka sikan do no basak no ighimu rin to daruwa no kuron. Songo kuwo ko duon igmaroyow rin to sagboka su oyow maroyow no ogpitawon, di ka dangob, oghimuon din do duon no oglitos to ogkasugbaan.
Konon sikaniu ka nig-alam koddi. Koddi ian ka nig-alam kaniu woy nigsugu kud sikaniu oyow ogpokohimu kow to maroyow no bogas to pogtuu now no kono ogkaawo Ian oyow ogbogayan kow to ogbuyuon now dio to Amoy ku ko ogsampit kow to ngaran ku.
aliwas
Du-on igko-ima no maroyow, ko nokoy ka oghimuon to duma ta no maroyow, ian ta rò og-unugon.
Ko duon otow no ogbayung to pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu, kono now pamminoga ko waro daruwa woy ko tatolu no otow no ogpakapamalogot to tu-tuu ian ka ignangon.
Sikan ian to, ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus woy ka mgo nigtuu woy ka mgo pogbuyagon dan no dio to Hirusalim, tibo nig–uyun to maroyow kandan ko duon duma ran no mgo lukos no og–alamon dan no ogparumoon dan ki Pablo woy ki Birnabi no oglibong dio to Antiokia. No ian dan pigsugu si Hudas no oghingaranan ki Barsabas, woy si Silas su ogtahuron sikandan to mgo duma ran no nigtuu ki Hisus.
Soini no tatolu no boi ka nigdurumaruma ki Hisus ko rio to Galilia no ogbulig to og-awoson din dio. Duon dod dio ka mohon-ing no dangob no mgo boi no nigduma kandin ko dio to Hirusalim.
goposn
Du-on nigbogoy koddì to sulat. Kagi to sika otow no nigtilala ku, “Igpa-alap ku bag no nangon to og-uroik a diò to Maambago.”
butud
Manampulu woy daruwa no malan ka ogpangotoban no ogligkat to tag sagboka no pinanganak ni Israil no si Huda, si Rubin, si Gad, si Asir, si Niptali, si Manasis, si Simion, si Libi, si Isakar, si Sabulun, si Husi, woy si Binhamin.
luntoy
otob
Kono ogkarago ka sikan no otow ko duon maroot no oghimuon, di ogkarago to tibo no ogkohimu no maroyow.
lokon
ugpò
Kono ogbogoy si Hirodis to ogpohimatayan si Huan su nahallok si Hirodis ki Huan su nataga to matuwarong ka batasan ni Huan woy to nigpamminog to Magboboot sikandin. Ian to ogkalasagan do ni Hirodis si Huan. Agad ogkoulingol on si Hirodis ko nigdinog to innangon ni Huan, maroyow rin ian to ogpamminog.
Ka otow, ogkilkil to pa-a di konò ogdogosan; ogwo-ilan din dò du-on.
Ko ogkataman dò to laplap to woig ka sikan no luang to balutu, ogka-agod-od on.
Ko du-on ogsugù no ogpanhimatayan, ogtuman sikandin.
Ian su nataga a to waro agad nokoy no ogpakaatang kanta to dakol no pogkohoy-u no imbogoy to Magboboot kanta no nigligkat to nighimu ni Hisu Kristu kanta. Ian su agad ko manokal ki rod woy ko ogkamatoy ki, kono ogkaawo ka pogkohoy-u rin kanta. Waro diwata woy waro busow no ogpakaawo to pogkohoy-u rin. Woy kono ogkaawo ligkat ko nokoy ka ogkabayaan ta kuntoon woy ko ligkat ko nokoy ka ogkabayaan ta uromo. Woy songo kono ogkaawo ka pogkohoy-u rin ko ligkat to agad nokoy no mabogbog
Omunaan ognangonan ku sikaniu, ogpasayluon to Magboboot ka otow no ogkagi woy ko oghimu to agad nokoy no maroot. Di kono ogpasayluon to Magboboot ka otow no ogligal to hinimuan to Gimukud to Magboboot.
Di sikaniu, kono now oghimua no unawa. Ko ogkoiniatan nu to ogkohimu ka no igbuyag, og-awos to ogbuligan nu ka mgo duma nu.
Ogkabinalayan on ka baloy.
balangon
Ogpabbi-ad a to poka ku no ig-ali-ad ku su masakit ka poka ku.
bunag
tadtad
No ka mgo taga Suduma woy ka mgo taga Gumura no makasasalo, songo nanlogparan on dongan to Magboboot no nigbobootan din oyow ogkoubus sikandan ogkamatoy to hapuy no impasilab din to mgo ugpaan dan. No sikan ka ingkabohog din to duma no mgo otow no kono ogpaagad-agad to Magboboot.
tuktuk
Nigtalibongbongan si Hisus to mgo otow.
Di sikaniu no nigtuu on ki Hisus, ogbayung kow to songo duma now rod to pogtuu. Kono no sikan do di dio kow atag ogpohusoy to otow no waro nigtuu.
Malig-ot ka gumawan woy mohirap ka dalan no pohondio to Magboboot. Manalingboka ro ka mgo otow no ogbayo to soini no dalan.”
Nò, nigbobootan to Magboboot ka tibo no mgo otow, to kasagboka ro ogkamatay. No pogkaponga, ogbobootan on to Magboboot to maroyow woy ko ogkalogparan.
Ko moon-ing ka ogkatugaan no unawa rin no manukmanuk, apu-an ka igngaran noy to sikan no ayam no ogpaka-ayat to duma rin.
Tingangag ka asu to ngalap.
sowsow
lambalamban
Ian su nigpabautismuan on sikandan to ngaran ni Hisus no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta di waro pad mabogayi sikandan to Gimukud din.
lawa
Mgo sulod, duon igpohitaga ku kaniu kuntoon no nokani waro pad matagoi to mgo otow. No ian to ignangon ku kaniu su oyow kono kow ogparakoldakol to mgo Hudiu. Ka ignangon ku, soini: agad to duon mgo Hudiu kuntoon no kono ogpaagad-agad no ogtuu to kinagian to Magboboot, di uromo ko ogpakatood no ogpasakup ka tibo no mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no tahan no pig-abin on to Magboboot, songo ogtuu on ka mgo Hudiu.
bansag
Sikaniu no naangol og-inso a ko og-awoson now pad to duon igpapitow ku kaniu no igmalogot to waro ian pulus to pogtuu ta ko waro maroyow no oghimuon ta?
Igkaruwa, kono no un-unawa ka tibo no mgo lawa. Songo loin ka lawa to otow. Songo loin ka lawa to mgo ulod-ulod. Songo loin ka lawa to mgo manukmanuk. Woy songo loin man do ka lawa to mgo ngalap to woig.
butaku
Pogkapawo, nighondio man do si Moisis to sikan no ugpaan to mgo duma rin, no nakabayo man do to daruwa no otow no nigpoog–ogotoy. Nigpoul–ulioy on porom ni Moisis to sikan no otow no pigkagian din to, ‘Manio to ogpoog-ogotoy kow to sikan do ka apu now?’
Ogkohoy-u kaniu no mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy ka mgo Parisiu. Ogpatuutuu ro ka pogtuu now to Magboboot. Ko duon otow no ogsolod porom to Pogsugu to Magboboot ogbalabagan now ka dalan dan. Sikaniu, kono kow atag ogpakasolod to Pogsugu to Magboboot woy kono now ogpasoloron ka duma no ogsolod porom.
go-on
lanlan
Pogdinog ni Hisus to tabak to sikan no igbuyag, nigkagi kandin to, “Duon dod sagboka no oghimuon nu rod. Ibaligya nu ka tibo no kalaglagan nu no pambogayi nu ka mgo publi to sikan no salapi. Ko ogpakatuman ka to sikan, duon dakol no igkaratu nu dio to langit no ugpaan to Magboboot. Ko impambogoy nud on, libong ka dii woy dumaruma kad on koddi.”
woy ka agad nokoy no ogpaampow-ampow no ogpakaatang to tu-tuu ian no pog-anad tongod to Magboboot. Woy songo ogkaroog noy on ka agad nokoy no ogpakasuwoy no doromdom to oyow ogkohimu on no ogpakapaagad-agad to soini no tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu.
gibis
Kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Malopot so pogdoromdom now! Malugoy kow ogtuu to tibo no innangon dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot!”
Nò mgo anak ku bag no indakoli ku to goinawa, ian ku ogkoilingan ka songo boi no oglogonan to pog-anak din. Ian su songo oggoramon ku ka masakit to goinawa ku su ogpoomotan ku man do to oghutuk to pog-anad kaniu taman to ogpokounug kow on lagboy ki Kristu.
No dio dod ogtagad taman to ogdoogon on to Magboboot ka tibo no mgo usig din.
Sikan ian ka ungod koy og-ampu to Magboboot to oyow ka oghimuon now, ogkaayun on to pogtuu now su naabin kow on nikandin. Woy og-ampu koy to oyow, ligkat to kabogbogan din, igpatuman din kaniu ka tibo no maroyow no ogtuuron now no ogligkat to pogtuu now kandin.
tinokak
Ka ogdi-okan ta, ian ka katkat.
sundug
Woy nangoni nu sikandan to oyow oglingawan dan on ka mgo nangnangonon no waro pulus woy ka ogpalista to mgo ngaran to mgo kaap-apuan dan ko hontow buwa, su ian do ogkoumaan to sikan ko ogpakatag-an do duon sikandan ko hondoi longod ka tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon no ogmaal-ap-apuloy on. Ka sikan, kono ogpakabulig ko nokoy ka igpasabut to Magboboot kanta no ogligkat to pogtuu ta kandin.
digus
Di songo duon mgo pinanganak ni Israil no nigpanaganaan to Magboboot to pougpaan dio to langit, di songo duon otow no igpandogpak dio to hapuy no waro katamanan. Ogkikigot ka mgo ngipon dan woy ogsinogow sikandan no ogkabaybayaran lagboy sikandan.”
dongan
Kono ki ogmugongmugong, su sikan dod ka batasan to pila buwa kandan no duon diwata rin no nigsugu din to oyow ogpohimatayan on sikandan.
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to, “Ian inghongkai ku to tano su nig-alap a to iglogpad to mgo otow. No sika iglogpad, unawa ian to hapuy no ogparakotan. Maroyow ku porom ko nalogdog on kuntoon.
Ko pinabayo to limang no paa nu no ogpakasalo ka no og-ongkoran nu ka pogtuu nu to Magboboot, tampori nu ka paa nu. Madmaroyow to ogpokougpo ka no waro katamanan dio to Magboboot no sagboka naan do ka paa nu to igdogpak ka to imperno no duon dod darua no paa nu.
sugnal
tindalikday
tambal
Agad to kono a no pandoy to ogpamatbat, di kono ogkaalang-alang ka katagaanan ku. No ligkat to sikan, ogkoutasan noy sikaniu to tibo no ig-anad noy.
Sikan ian, agad hontow no waro ikasulat ka mgo ngaran dan dio to sikan no sulatanan to ngaran to mgo otow no ogbogayan to kouyagan to waro katamanan, igdogpak on dio to sikan no ogliabliab no hapuy.
Sikanak no si Pablo, suguanon a ni Hisu Kristu su sikan ka imboot to Magboboot. Sikanak woy si Timoteo no sulod ta to pogtuu ka nigsulat kaniu no mgo nigtuu to Magboboot no dio to lunsud to Kurintu woy ka dio to probinsia to Girisia.
ulus
Ogso-om kunto-on su tikakamot.
Di ogtabakon kow pad oghutuka to, ‘Ognangonan ku sikaniu to waro a mogtokod kaniu. Kaniu no mgo makasasalo, awo kow on kai to koddi.’
bo-ot
no sikandin ka nigpakimatoy no igbalukas to mgo salo to tibo no mgo otow. No ligkat to sikan no nohimu to litos no allow, impamalogot din to ogkoiniatan din to ogkapangabangan ka tibo no mgo otow to mgo salo dan.
Di sikoykow atag Timoteo, paragasa nu ka pogtuu nu to sikan no impaanad koykow no lagboy ka nataga no tu-tuu ian su natagaan nud on ian ka nig-anad koykow no ogkasaligan.
Sikaniu no ogsalig to pogtuman now poron to Balaod ni Moisis su nahan now no ian ka ogpokohimu kaniu no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, niglokaan now si Kristu. No sikan ian to naatangan kow on to sikan no pogkohoy-u rin poron kaniu.
Ka otow no nakasalò no ogdakopon ta, ogkagi ki to, “Konò kad og-atu su no-upul kad on no nalingutan kad on.”
Nigkagi to mgo igbuyag to talagpanubad ki Pilatu. Kagi, “Waro nu porom isulat to ‘Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu.’ Insulat nud porom to ‘Nignangonan din to sikandin ka Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hinibriu.’ ”
Di duon anakon ni Pablo no lukos no anak to atoboy rin no nakarinog to tuud to mgo otow to oggopasan dan poron si Pablo. Nighondio to kampu to mgo sundalu no nignangonan din si Pablo to sikan no pigdinog din.
Agad to duon katondanan noy no litos poron ko nigbuyu koy pa poron kaniu to ogkakoon noy, wa koy nig-awos. Dokad di to nigtalabau koy atag to oyow ogkapanag-ilingan now ka batasan noy.
Ka mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisus kai to lunsud to Babilunia no songo nig-abin to Magboboot, ogpapangumusta kaniu. No si Markos, songo ogpapangumusta kaniu. Sikandin, ogkounawa to anak kud on ian lagboy.
abat
Ko tigbogas on to sikan no ubas, nigsugu ka tagtuun to sagboka no suguonon din dio oyow og-angoy to kandin no talad.
Di songo og-awoson to ogpabulig koy kaniu to mgo pog-ampu now oyow, mohon-ing ka ogpakapasalamat to sikan no igkohoy-u to Magboboot kanami no ogligkat to mohon-ing ka og-ampu kanami.
nout
No ko nigbayo si Hisus to sikan no Doyroyawon no Sinabong, nigparagas on to nigsolod dio to sikan no Kinaroyawan no Sinabong no dio to Langit. Ka sagboka ro ka pogsolod din no waro din alapa ka langosa to mgo kambing woy ko nati to baka to igtubad din. Di ian din nig-alap atag no igtubad ka kandin lagboy no langosa no igbalukas to mgo salo to mgo otow taman to waro katamanan.
Ian su kono no tuud noy ko ogsayoon koy nikaniu. Di duon dod tuud noy ko duon igkatabak now to sikan no mgo otow no ogkabantug to mgo otow no dakol so ngaran di kono ogdoromdomon ko nokoy ka dio to goinawa ran.
Nighutuk nig-inso si Hisus to, “Hontow ka ogpamitawon now?” Nigtabak to, “Si Hisus no matig Nasarit.”
To ogkapawo on nalimud on ka mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu, woy ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to Dakol no Ampuanan dan lagkos to mgo talag-anad to Balaod, no nig-alap dan si Hisus oyow ogpakatangko sikandin to tibo no nalimud no mgo igbuyag.
Nò, to an-anayan no allow to Pagkoonan no oghingaranan to Paan no Wa Amuti to Igpatulin nig-inso ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus kandin to, “Hondoi no baloy no ipanagana noy ka iglabung ta to soin no pagkoonan?”
Anoy on no-otow si Huan, diad on ka Magboboot to pusung din su kandin ian ka nigbo-ot ki Huan no no-otow.
Songo allow nigdani dio to longod ni Hisus si Santiago woy si Huan no mgo anak ni Sibidiu Kagi ran ki Hisus, “Maistru, duon ogkoiniatan noy no oghimuon nu porom.”
Ian noy innangon kaniu to soini su duon kun dio to kaniu no mgo otow no pogulon. Kono kun ogtalabau, di ogtalantanon dan ka duma ran to kandan no talabau.
kusapong
boyav
dayagang
Ka otow no du-on tu-ud kanta, ogparagasdagas no ognangon kanta ko nokoy ka tu-ud din. Konò din ogtagad to tagbaloy og-insò kandin ko nokoy ka tu-ud din no ogparagas din dò to ognangon to og-awoson din.
ga-an
Agad mohon-ing so mgo ogkoinuinu no pighimu ni Hisus dio to tangkaan dan, wa dan pad atag tuui sikandin
Sikan ian to pinohun–a ni Pablo si Timoteo woy si Irastu, daruwa no talagbulig din, dio to Masidonia di nig–ugpo pad si Pablo dio to Asia.
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Sagboka ro ian kaniu no sampulu woy darua no sikandin do ian ka ogpokorongan koddi no ighalit din ka paan din dio to boung.
tamusan
Kono now lomoti ka agad sagboka no otow no iam pad nigtuu koddi no ian ogkounawaan to soini no bato. Malogot ka ignangon ku kaniu no ka diwata no suguanon to Amoy ku no ogbantoy kandan, malasi duon dio to tangkaan to Amoy ku dio to langit.
bogsil
lanok
Di waro mog-unawa ka ogkoumaan to sikan no daruwa su ka pogkohoy-u to Magboboot, waro mog-unawa to salo ni Adan. Malogot ian to mohon-ing ka ogkamatoy su ligkat to salo to sagboka ro no otow no si Adan. Di dakoldakol pad ka pogkohoy-u to Magboboot no imbogoy rin do duon to mohon-ing no mgo otow. No ka sikan no pogkohoy-u rin, songo nigligkat to sagboka ro no otow no si Hisu Kristu.
Warad buwa igkabatbat ku su warad igliwak ku to ogbatbat tongod ki Gidion, woy si Barak, si Samson, si Dipta, si Dabid, si Samuel, woy ka mgo talagnangon to kagi no ogligkat to Magboboot dongan.
pangulintò
Ka mgo lukos no bato-bato pad koykow, songo udlingi nu oyow ogponoran dan ka ogkoiniatan to mgo lawa ran no kono no litos.
ulason
Nigtabak ka igbuyag din to, ‘Maroyow ka pighimu nu. Maroyow ka no suguanon ku, no su maroyow ka pog-alap nu to insalig ku koykow, ogbogayan ku sikoykow to katondanan to og-alap to sampulu no lunsud.’ ”
silsil
talun
Ogsamboy ki to tanò. Ogso-up a.
So-oyad ka usa.
Ogkounawa to impanoy innangon ni Isaias dongan tongod to mgo pinanganak ni Israil. Kagi rin to, “Ko waro kinow mohoy-ui to Magboboot no ian lagboy no mabogbog no Igbuyag, waro poron agad pila kanta no ogkasamo, su nounawa kinow poron to mgo taga Suduma woy ka mgo taga Gumura no noubus on ian mammatoy.”
No ka gimukud din, nighondio to ugpaan no napirisuan to mgo gimukud to mgo otow no nammatoy dongan. No nignangnangonan ni Hisus sikandan to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon.
bahal
doson
Tugunan kow.
Litos porom to songo og-anad ko ogpakasokod to ogkounawa ka katouan din to sikan to maistru rin woy ko ogpakasokod ka suguanon ko ogkounawa ka kandin no katondanan to sikan to igbuyag din. Ko sikoddi no igbuyag now, ko oghingaranan a to Biilsibul, no labion kaniu no mgo hibatoon ku, labow pad no maroot ka ighingaran kaniu.”
og-ian
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Ka mgo otow kai to soin no kalibutan kuntoon, maroot lagboy ka oghimuon dan woy nig-ongkoran dan ka Magboboot. Nò, ka sika mgo otow, agad hontow sikandan, ko igkasipod dan to ognangon to koddi ka Igbuyag dan, woy ko igkasipod dan to ig-anad ku, sikoddi no Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan, songo igkasipod ku sikandan to poglibong ku kai to tano. No, to sika poglibong ku, duon kai to koddi ka kabogbogan to Amoy ku no Magboboot. Lagkos, ogduma koddi ka mgo diwata no suguanon din.”
kombul
Kagi ran, “Dakol ka pogsayo ta to Magboboot dio to Langit, woy kai to tano, ogmaawang on so goinawa to mgo otow no ogkohoy-uan din.”
tiltil
laag
pori
Ogbakuli-on ku ka mo-irob ku ko ogpisal a to agoloy.
No ka sikan no dakol no ulod no oghingaranan to daragun, pogkataga rin to indogpak on sikandin dio to tano, niggapon din on ka boi no nig-anak to bato no lukos.
Nò, ogdani kinow on ki Hisu Kristu. Sikandin ka ogpakabogoy kanta to kouyagan no waro katamanan. No sikandin dod ka ogkounawa to batu no ogpabunsuran ta to baloy. Di ka mgo otow, ogkounawa to mgo talaghimu to baloy no waro mogpurut to sikan no batu. Dokad di, ian on ka naabin woy nig-awos lagboy to Magboboot.
Malayat ka ogkasabukan to goinawa rin. Mananoy ogkamatoy.
sukal
Ka otow no ogboli to wasoy, ognanoynanoy ka ogpitow su ka maroyow, ogku-on din.
Di ko og-ampu koy to Magboboot, ian noy igbuyu to oyow kono kow oghimu to agad nokoy no maroot. Ka sikan no ig-ampu noy, kono no oyow igmalogot to maroyow ka pog-alap to katondanan noy. Agad ko kono ogtokoron to maroyow ka pog-alap noy to katondanan noy su ian do tuud noy to og-ampu to oyow ogpokohimu kow to maroyow ro.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan to pananglitan. Nigkagi to, “Litos to goinawa now to kono ogkoon ka mgo pigtugunan to pagkoonan to kasal? Ka ku kow! Ko duon pad ka lukos no ogpangasawa, kono ogkaayun no oglangkad ogkoon. Di ko ogdakopon on ka lukos no ogpangasawa, nò, sikan on ka allow no oglangkad on sikandan no ogkoon.”
bat-ow
Ka manggianak no upa, ko mahapun on, ogkupkupan din ka mgo anak din.
Nò, to dio si Pablo to lunsud to Militu, nigpatugunan din ka mgo pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu no taga Episu oyow oghondio to kandin dio to Militu.
Ian su ka tibo no ogkoumaan to layag, ogkabat-awan on. No ko ogkabat-awan on, ogpakatokod ko nokoy on ka mgo batasan. Sikan dod ian ka lituk to soini dangob no pananglitan: “Sikaniu no ogmanhirogo, himata kow on. Woy sikaniu no nammatoy, kokouyag kow on, no ogkabat-awan kow on ni Kristu.”
tomu
Di natagaan tad to ogkapangabanganan kinow on to mgo salo ta su ligkat to pogkohoy–u to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. No ogkoun–unawa ro man kandan no kono no Hudiu,” kagi ni Pedro.
Tigbal dò olora.
Nò mgo sulod, dakol lagboy ka pogtuu now ki Hisus woy ka pog-uwang now to katagaanan now no nigligkat to Magboboot. Woy moingos kow to ogbulig to mgo duma now, woy indakoli koy nikaniu to goinawa. Sikan ian to ogkoiniatan noy no songo ogdakolon now ka igbogoy now no igkohoy-u now to sikan no mgo nigtuu no dio to Hudia.
Nabalowbalow ka sabut noy su nigpogos a rin on to ogpabayad.
Nò, kagi rin kandan, “Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu. Ogkitoon now pad ka gapun no ogkaboklas no ogkitoon now ka mgo diwata no suguanon to Magboboot no oghondini to koddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan woy og-uli dio.”
Kagi ni Hisus to, “Kaniu no mgo Parisiu, ogmaroyow ka batasan now ko ogpitawon kow to mgo otow, di dio to goinawa now, mohon-ing ka igkoiniat now no kalaglagan woy duon dod duma no maroot no bantaan now. Ogkounawa ka mgo batasan now ko pananglitan, ian now og-ay-ayaran oghugasi ka poka to mgo palatu now woy ka lawa to mgo basu now di maligsom dod ka dio to solod to basu woy maligsom dod ka dio to ampow to palatu.
igpudpud on ka mgo suloy to baloy su namolù on.
bag
Di kono kow ogparakoldakol to tahan no sugpang su ko ogparakoldakol kow pa, kono now kalingawi to kono ogligkat kaniu ka kouyagan to dalig to kayu, di dio to dalig ka ligkatan to kaniu no kouyagan.
du-on
Nò, nigparuma ni Annas si Hisus no nabanggutan dod dio ki Kaipas no sikandin ka Labow to mgo Talagpanubad.
Ian su ka Magboboot ka ogligkatan to tibo no nohimu, woy sikandin dod ka ogsugu to tibo. Woy ligkat to tibo no nohimu, ogkasayo ka ngaran din. Sayoon ta ka Magboboot to waro katamanan. Hoo ian.
pipi
Pogligkat noy to Niapolis, nighipanow koy no oghondio to lunsud to Pilipus. Ian ka mabantug no lunsud no duon to probinsia to Masidonia. Ka mohon–ing no taga Pilipus, nigligkat to dakol no lunsud to Ruma. No dio koy pad nig–ugpo to Pilipus to pila pad no allow.
Tukolisan ku ka baluy.
no nigpaagbotan dan ka kagi ran to, “Hisus, Buyag, kohoy-ui koy.”
To napongaan on woy ni Husi ka pogtuman dan to tibo no batasan to sikan no Balaod to Magboboot no ingkasulat dongan, nig-uli on sikandan dio to ugpaan dan dio to Nasarit duon to Probinsia to Galilia.
To ogkagi pad si Simion ki Maria dio to solod to Ampuanan, niglopow on si Ana dio to kandan no nigpasalamatan din on ka Magboboot. Nò, nignangon sikandin bahin to soini no bato dio to tibo no nakitaan din no mgo otow no oglayun sikandan og-iman-iman ko kon-u ogpangabangi to Magboboot ka mgo taga Hirusalim.
Ka amoy ni Husi, si Huda. Ka amoy ni Huda, si Hoanan. Ka amoy ni Hoanan, si Risa. Ka amoy ni Risa, si Sirobabil. Ka amoy ni Sirobabil, si Salatiel. Ka amoy ni Salatiel, si Niri.
su nigdinog a to nangnangonon tongod to pogtuu nu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus woy to dakol ka goinawa nu to tibo no mgo otow no ogtuu kandin.
Nignangonan ni Huan ka mgo otow to, “Duon ogpakasundul koddi no dakoldakol pad koddi ka katondanan din. Doisok ka koddi no katondanan agad to oghokad to mgo sandal din.
Ogka-aligan ta ka maroyow no batok.
Sikan ian to pigdakop dan ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus no impapirisu ran on.
Waro ingkahallok ni Pablo to pognangonnangon din woy to og–anad tongod to pogpasakup to pandatuan to Magboboot woy tongod ki Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. Woy waro ogsapad kandin.
li-og
Sikan ian to waro a nigligal ko pighinggat a now kai. No kuntoon, og–inso a kaniu ko nokoy ka impaangoy now kanak?” kagi ni Pedro.
pamalas
Nò, kagi ni Hisus kandin, “Pamminog ka Usi, kono nu nangoni ka agad hontow to soini no nighimu ku koykow. Di hondio ka to talagpanubad dio to Dakol no Ampuanan oyow ipapitow nu kandan to noulian kad on to sikan no kogang nu. Nò, bogoy ka to Magboboot to insugu ni Moisis dongan no igtubad. Tumana nu soini su ian ka igpoitaga to tibo no mgo otow to noulian kad on to kogang nu.”
Di kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Balagara now sikandin. Manio to ogsasawon now sikandin to maroyow man ka nighimu rin koddi.
Ka asu no manggianak, ogmagu-on din ka itù din.
pakoy
Di og-awoson to ian igkasayo kandan ka maroyow no oghimuon dan. Sikan ka litos to mgo otow no ognangon to ogsimboon dan ka Magboboot.
sangkung
gasò
Nanlimudlimud ka tibo, no sagboka ro ka goinawa ran to og–ungod ogman–ampu to tangkaan to Magboboot. Duon mgo boi no nan–amut kandan to pog–ampu, woy nigduma ka inoy ni Hisus woy ka mgo hari rin no lukos.
Ka mgo otow no no-umaan diò to “pool” to du-on nalonod no duma ran, no-upul sikandan ko ogmonuon dan to ogpangabang. Sikan ian ka natonongan on.
Pogkaponga, mohon–ing ka nandaralu no taga Malta no nanhondio ki Pablo, no tibo moulii to pogdaralu ran.
Di ogkasaligan tanow si Hisus no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta to songo ogbantayan kow rin woy ogpanokalnokal to goinawa ta oyow kono kow ogkaroog ni Satanas.
Ko napolis poron ka pa-a nu no agpas ka nakagongon, no nagawa kad on poron.
Nig–uuy–uyunan dan ko nokoy ka oghimuon dan ki Hisus. Di ka pighimu ran kandin, ian do ka impanoy nu innangon dongan no igpatuman nu kandin.
Nig-a-agap ka darua.
Nò, nighipanow dio to kandin no ugpaan no nighingaranan to Dikapolis su duon sampulu no lunsud dio. Niglogoblogob din ka sikan sampulu no lunsud no ognangonnangon to mgo otow bahin to kabogbogan ni Hisus kandin no noinuinu ka tibo no mgo otow.
bokal
Nigtabak ka duma to, “Hoo sikandin man ian.” Duon dod duma no nigtabak no kagi ran, “Kono no soini; ogkounawa ro kandin.” Nò, nigkagi on ka sikan no nabawian on. Kagi rin, “Sikoddi man ian.”
Takas din to niggamit [ka gabas], impasamboy rin man dò to songo otow.
Nò, to pog-anad noy kaniu, innangonnangon noy ka pogkouyag ni Hisu Kristu ligkat to kamatayon din. No su malogot sikan, manio naan to duon mgo otow dio to kaniu no ognangon to kono ogkouyag ka mgo nammatoy uromo.
Ko du-on pagko-onan to ogpangasawa, no ko du-on ogkakulang to ko-onon, ogdansuan ta to ogbogoy to ogko-omon ka nakulang.
Si Hisus no sangoy no ogngaranan ki Hustu, songo ogpangamusta kaniu. No ka soini no tatolu, si Aristarku, si Markos woy si Hustu, ian naan do no mgo Hudiu no duma ku kai no ogbulig kanak to ognangonnangon tongod to pandatuan to Magboboot. Dakol ka ingkabulig dan kanak.
boi
Ko ogkatangkob on no magaan no karusilom, niglibuwas dio to Hirusalim woy si Hisus no og-uli dio to Bitini.
No duon mgo otow no nigbogayan ni Hisus to katondanan to oyow ogpakabulig sikandan to mgo otow no ogtuu kandin. Duon nighimu rin no mgo suguanon din. Woy duon nighimu rin on no mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot. Woy duon duma no nigbogayan din to ogkatouanan dan to og-alap-alap to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon. No duon duma no nigbogayan to katondanan to og-alap to mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisus woy to oyow ogkaanad dan ka duma ran.
Tibo no inkaholos, ogbatukon do no ogkakitaan. Woy tibo no kono igpayag, ogkatagaan on.”
untud
sakang
tandok
No ka tibo no nigtuu no kai to Ipisu, igpanangon dan to songo ogpangumusta kun kaniu tibo. Sikaniu dio no nigtuu, songo pakumkumustooy kow ko ogpakitkitooy kow su duma now to ogtuu.
Tupakan ka manggad.
amulu
Kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandan, “Ko amoy now ka Magboboot, duon porom goinawa now koddi su dio a man to nigligkat no kuntoon, kai ad on. Waro a moghondini to koddi no katondanan ko kono no igpaalap a rin do.
Si Apù Amasig ka nignangonnangon kanak to ogngilam ki su du-on ogpoko-uma no mangayow.
Du-on ka iam no alunggun, ko ogpangiram ka boi, ogko-ibog-ibog to bogas to mangga no ogpogos to iglukos din to ogpakuò to mangga. Mangkuan ko du-on on, konad ogko-ibogan.
Songo duon darua no mgo boi no ogbibinayu. Ka sagboka ogbatunon to Magboboot woy ka dangob ogkagalat.
Ogkounawa ian kaniu kuntoon,” kagi ni Hisus kuwo to mgo hibatoon din. “Duon masakit to goinawa now kuntoon di ogkohutuk a now pad ogkakitoi. Nò, ogkarago lagboy ka goinawa now no agad hontow, kono ogpakaawo to sika igkarago now.”
salang
Ko oghalin ki diò songo ugpa-an, mgo agpot ki rò.
limu
Ogbuyu a to Magboboot no Amoy ta woy ki Hisu Kristu no ian Anak din oyow ogbuligan ki woy ogkohoy-uan ki woy ogbogayan ki to maawang no goinawa no ogligkat to oggongonan ta ka tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon, woy ogligkat dod to dakol no goinawa ran kanta.
Nò, waro poron otow no oghisakit kaniu ko ogkitoon dan to ogpoomot kow no oghimu to maroyow.
Di kagi to mgo dangob, “Kono ogpakanangon ka nigsoloran to busow no unawa to kagi rin. Woy kono ogpakabawi ka busow to mata to mgo nabutud.”
taman
Oghagsilan ki to duma ta ko malugoy no waro ki nigkikita. Oglituk to nasampot.
Nò, mgo sulod, ka sikan, ogkounawa rod kanta su ko namatoy si Hisu Kristu no nigtobus to salo ta, nounawa to nakalagkos kinow on to kandin no pogkamatoy. Ligkat to sikan, naawo kinow on to katondanan to Balaod no inggalat ni Moisis oyow ogkohimu kinow on no sakup ni Kristu no nouyag on to kamatayon din. No ian to nohimu ka sikan su oyow ogkohimu no ogpakatuman kinow on to mgo koiniatan to Magboboot.
Napantigan si Inò
panta-as
Di mgo sulod, ka Magboboot ka oghogot to pogtuu ta ki Kristu. No ka Magboboot dod ka nig-abin kanta
sungoy
Naanggilanggilangan so-i baoy.
Nighipanow on si Hisus no nighondio sikandin to sikan no ugpaan no marani to mgo lunsud no oghingaranan to Tiru woy Sidon.
Kono kow ogdoromdom to madmaroyow kow su nakaliwan kow to tahan no sugpang no natampod.
molù
Ka pog-anad ku kaniu nokani, waro nounawa to makogal no koonon di nounawa ro to gatas no ogpoinum ta to mgo bato no malintok pad su kono kow pad ogpakasabut to maralom no ig-anad. Agad kuntoon, kono kow pad ogpakasabut to maralom no pog-anad
No to katondanan ni Hisus no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, ogsugu a kaniu to oyow ipabasa now ka soini no sulat dio to tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu kandin.
Woy songo sagboka ro ka Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow no si Hisus no ogtuuan ta. Woy songo kasagboka ro ka pogpabautismu ta.
Ian su ogpagkol ka soini no mgo otow. Ogpabongolbongol sikandan to sikan no tu–tuu ian no nangnangonon woy ogpiong on su ogkakuwo ko ogpakakita woy ko ogpakarinog woy ko ogpakasabut no oghalinon ka goinawa ran kai to kanak no ogmaroyawon ku sikandan,” kinagian to Magboboot.” ’
Binayukan on ka sikan no boi.
ogko-ibog
Ko ogkatibò on ka igbayad nu, ogpakapurut kad on to kuddò
bagongbangan
Poghipanow si Hisus, mgo hibatoon din nigkita rin ka songo lukos no nabutud ligkat to pogkootow rin.
Ko mo-ilow pad, ka agoloy, og-alabat ki to litos no ogkasugba.
pariay
salingsing
Kono kud on ogmalayaton ku ka kagi ku kaniu kuntoon su marani on ka sikan no talagboot to soin no kalibutan no si Satanas ian. Di kono ogpakaroog koddi.
lukag
Di noiniatan ni Silas to og–ugpo pad dio to Antiokia.
Ko du-on otow no ogdakopon ta, ogkagi ki to, “Konò kad og-atu su no-upul kad on no nalingutan kad on.”
Ogkukutkut ka asu su og-abalangon din ka ambow diò to lungag to tanò.
Doromdoma now ka dakol no pogkohoy-u to Magboboot kanta su oghingaranan ki to mgo anak to Magboboot, no tu-tuu ian to nohimu kid on no anak din. Di ka mgo otow to soini no kalibutan no waro nigtuu, kono ogtokod to sikanta ka anak din su songo waro nigtokod ki Hisus.
No ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no nan–ugpo dio to mgo probinsia to Hudia, woy to Galilia, woy ka dio to Samaria, nigmaroyow on ka pog–ugpo dan su warad og–ogot kandan. Nohirosonan ka pogtuu ran ki Hisus. No agad nokoy no oghimuon dan, og–ayunon dan on ka batasan dan to pogtahud dan ki Hisus. Woy nigbuligan to Gimukud to Magboboot ka goinawa ran woy natimtimulan on ka mgo otow no nigtuu.
Ko nokouma on, nig-alam din ka sampulu no lukos woy darua oyow sikandan ka ungod ogduma kandin. Ogpohipanow rin sikandan pad to ogwali woy oyow ligkat to kabogbogan no ogbogayan din sikandan, ogpakarogil sikandan to mgo busow no nigsolod to lawa to mgo otow. No nighingaranan din sikandan to apostolis.
Wà hanow ku.
Asawa ni Moddina.
loban
To poghipanow woy ni Hisus, duon sagboka no boi no nigdani dut poka rin no nigsamsam din ka sikaran to kinabo din. Soini no boi duon dalu rin. Ungod sikandin oglangosa no waro ian nighagtong to sampulu woy darua on no tuid. Nakaroromdom sikandin ko ogpakasamsam do buwa to sikaran to kinabo din, ogkoulian sikandin to dalu rin.
Ka minuna ta no si Hakub, imbogoy rin kanta no pinanganak din to soini no balun. Soini ka woig no litos no ogkoinuman din, mgo anak din, tibo no mgo ayam din. Og-inso a ko labow ka buwa ki Hakub?”
sa-id
Woy nigduma rin si Pedro woy ka darua no anak ni Sibidiu. Nigmasakit lagboy so goinawa rin woy lagboy sikandin naaras.
taliun-a
Ka sikan mgo boni no nakasawod dut dugion no hilamunon, ogkounawa to mgo otow no ogpamminog to nangnangonon bahin to kinagian to Magboboot. Di magaan dan do ogkalingawi ka nigdinog dan su mohon-ing ka igkasasow ran kai to kalibutan woy ogkoiniat sikandan to salapi woy waro pulus kandan ka kinagian to Magboboot.
langkob
omaw
tolom
Kono kow og-alap to pitaka now. Agad kabil, kono, mgo sapatus, kono kow og-alap. Paragas kow ro dio to ogdatongan now. Ko duon otow no ogkabayaan now dio to dalan, ko kow ogsagdok oyow to pog-alukuy kandin.
Ka mgo Hudiu no waro mogtuu ka nighimatoy to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan. Woy mgo Hudiu rod ka nighimatoy to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus, woy mgo Hudiu rod ka nigdogil kanami. Kono no maroyow to Magboboot ka batasan dan. Ogpangusigon dan ka tibo no mgo otow
oyow ogpalibongan din on si Pablo dio to kandan to Hirusalim. Dokad di to nigmouy–uyunoy on sikandan to oggopas ki Pablo no dio pad to dalan su oghimatayan dan poron.
otow
tokow
Ko nigtotomog a to kayu no nalotoman on ka hapuy, nigdokotan on.
Songo maro-ot
bulan
Nò, nigbabansagon si Hisus no kagi rin, “Sikan no otow no ogtuu koddi, kono no sikoddi do ka ogtuuan din ko kono no songo ogtuuan din dod ka nigsugu koddi.
Dokad di, si Solomon on ka nokohimu to sikan no baloy.
lanog
Ko ogkadugi ka pa-a ta, ogkuiton ta to dagum oyow ogka-awò ka dugi.
su ko dio kow on to tangkaan dan og-anaran kow ro to Gimukud to Magboboot ko nokoy ka litos no igkatabak now,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ko mo-ugtu on ka allow, ko oghipanow ki diò to pantad no olin lanok, ko ogdi-ok ki, ogsilsil on ka mo-init to pa-a ta no ogko-iling to ogkatutung.
mugunmugun
sagpit
tibulus
Nò, ko nigkita to mgo otow to waro dio si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din, nan-untud on ka sikan no mgo otow to sikan no loin no mgo balutu no nighondio to Kapirnaum oyow ogpamitawon dan si Hisus ko hondoi nigdolog.
Ko duon hon-om naan do no allow woy ogbunsud ka Pagkoonan to Paligad, nighondio si Hisus to Bitania no ugpaan ni Lasaru no pig-uyag din ko namatoy on.
aponga
sonob
og-ayam
Ogbabantoy si Maria no taga Magdala woy si Maria no inoy ni Husi no nigkita ran ko hondoi ran isabal.
Nò, nigkagian ni Hisus ka mgo Hudiu no nigtuu on kandin. Kagi rin, “Ko ian now ro ogtumanon ka ig-anad ku, malogot no sakup ku sikaniu.
No ka igpamula ta, ka boni do no trigu woy to duma pad no bogas. Kono no ka lawa ka igpamula ta.
Nig-anad kow to inkasulat dio to Tahan no Kasulatan su nahan now ko ogtinawo kow, ian ka ligkatan to kouyagan now no waro katamanan. Di duon to sikan no Nasulatan ka innangon bahin koddi.
suang
Nabugsong ka lituk ko du-on kinagian no konò ogka-ayun.
panta-as
katkat
Ka tagbanua, nig-agpas no nigtagbu to magaliug no nigdatong to baloy rin. No nigbalowbalow ka nigpanangnangonoy.
Sikan ian no natagaan ni Pilatu no wa pulus to innangon din, su nataga on to ogsasamuk ka mgo otow. Omunaan no nigkuo sikandin to woig woy nigpanhugas dio to tangkaan to mgo otow no kagi rin, “Warad labot ku ko ogkamatoy sikandin; kaniu ka ogboboot.”
balikù
Agad to duon poron katondanan noy ko duon igkasayo now poron kanami su suguanon koy ni Kristu, di waro koy nigpasayo-sayo to agad hontow. Di ko dio koy to kaniu, nig-ay-ayaran noy ka pog-alap noy kaniu unawa to inoy no og-ayad-ayad to ogbantoy to mgo anak dan no malintok.
sobsob
Mgo sulod, ko dio a pad to kaniu, mababow ro ka pog-anad ku kaniu. Waro a maka-anad kaniu to maralom no oglitos porom to mgo otow no ogpaagad-agad to Gimukud to Magboboot su noiling to bato pad ka pogtuu now ki Kristu su ogpaagad-agaran now rod ka mgo maroot no ogkoiniatan to lawa now.
Si Titu, sikandin ka tahan no duma ku to ogbulig kaniu. No ka sikan no mgo duma rin, suguonon sikandan to mgo nigtuu no dio to duma no mgo lunsud. No ligkat to oghimuon dan, ogkasayo si Hisu Kristu.
patok
Ian su ka Magboboot ka nig-iam on to pogkouyag ta no nasagboka kinow on ki Hisu Kristu. No ligkat to sikan, ogkaayun kinow on to oghimu to mgo maroyow no impanoy rin imboot no oghimuon ta.
Kono ogkataman ka Pandatuan ni Hisus, woy waro ian katamanan to pogsugu din to mgo pinanganak ni Hakub.”
Og-abinon ni Joaquin ka taga Maambago no sakup din.
Nò, nataga ki lagboy to, ka duon katondanan to ogkohoy-u, ian mamabantug sikandin to sikan no ogkohoy-uan din.
Agad nokoy ka ignangon ku, konò ogpa-agad-agad ka inoy ku no og-ugpò diò to dangob no anak din.
Di kono ki atag ogkaligsoman dio to tangkaan to Magboboot to waro ki ay-ayari to ogpanhugas to bolad ta woy ki ogkoon no unawa to sugu to mgo Parisiu.”
sangguy
Kono no ka Magboboot ka nigpasuwoy kaniu su sikandin ka nigpatuu kaniu to oyow ogpokohipanow kow to dalan no oghondio to kandin.
Si Dabid, pinakagi to Gimukud to Magboboot no kagi rin, ‘Ka Magboboot, nigkagian din ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ku no kagi rin, Dini ka to kawanan ku ogpinnuu taman to ogkaroog ku ka tibo no mgo usig nu oyow ogpakaluhud sikandan dini to tangkaan nu.’
Ko ogsubla ka ogbosik no al-al, ogpakangangang ki to masakit.
Ka Magboboot ka ogmaawang to goinawa ta no ogbuyu a to oyow tiboon din awaa ka agad nokoy no maroot dio to goinawa now. Woy ogbuyu a to oyow igpanagana rin ka lawa now, ka goinawa now, woy ka gimukud now to oyow litos ka tibo woy to waro salo now ko oglibong ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu kai to soini no tano.
Nakari-ok a to tapilak no dagas nigtangkob to pa-a ku
Ko buyag ka og-ingol, ogpogospogos no ogduma.
ligtù
dokot
Woy songo duon mgo talag–anad to mgo tinuuan dan no oghingaranan to Ipikuriu woy ka Istuiku no songo nigpaal–alukuyoy ki Pablo. Duon ka nigkagi tongod ki Pablo to, “Nokoy ka ogkagion poron to soini amana matalo no waro mataga to ogkagion din?” Di kagi atag to duma to, “Inat to talagnangon to mgo magboboot to loin no ugpaan.” No ian to soini ka ogkagion dan su innangonnangon ni Pablo kandan tongod ki Hisus woy to duon uromo no allow no ogkouyag on ka mgo otow no ligkat to kamatayon dan.
dilin
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin to, “Kono ogkaayun no igbogoy ta ka koonon to mgo bato dio to mgo asu.”
Ko inggogoinawa ku si Hisus...
Songo nigkagi rin kandan, “Pamminog kow to soini no igkagi ku kaniu. Ka batasan nu ko ogbobootan nu ka mgo duma nu, songo igpounawa to Magboboot ka pogboot din koykow, di ogdakolon din ka kandin kaniu.”
koil
Tigaworon ki’t mariù.
Ian on amoy-amoy ka ogtangkò to alukuyan.
Di kono now maroota ka goinawa now kandin di udlingi now no ogkounawa to pog-udling now to hari now.
Kagi ni Pilipi, “Ogkohimu, ko ogtiboon nu ka goinawa nu to ogtuu ki Hisus.” Kagi to taga Itiopia to, “Ogtuu a ian to si Hisu Kristu, ian ka Anak to Magboboot.”
Dakol so goinawa to Amoy ku koddi su nigpanagana ad to igtob-us a to ogkamatoy oyow ogkouyag a ro.
Ko ogsalop ka allow, ogbunsud ogkausilom.
Ko dakol ka uran no ogkaponù ka luang to balutu, ogka-agod-od on.
Nò, ogbuyu a to Magboboot to oyow ogkohoy-uan din sikaniu tibo no igdakoli now to goinawa now no si Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. No awoson to sikan no goinawa now kandin ka kono ogkaawo to waro katamanan.
Tongod to sikan no Balaod ni Moisis, ka mgo otow no ogkohimu on no Labow to mgo Talagpanubad, ogpakasalo dod. Dokad di, ligkat to sikan no pogpangulibot to Magboboot no sunud to sikan no Balaod, nig-abin din ka Anak din. No waro atag sayop din to pogtuman to mgo tuud to Magboboot taman to waro katamanan.
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, agad to duon ka sikan no ingkasulat ku kaniu, kono no ka makasasalo woy songo kono no ka nasaloan din ka tuud ku to nigsulat a. Di ian tuud ku atag su oyow ogkataga kow tibo, no kai ki to tangkaan to Magboboot, to dakol ian ka goinawa now kanami.
Du-on nana-an magaliug nu?
Alomud
Nasa-ab to mangayow.
Nigpanlingi-lingi si Hisus dio to niglingotlingot kandin, no nakitaan din ka boi. Nignangonan ni Hisus sikandin to, “Igi, kono ka ogkahallok. Noulian kad to dalu nu su nigsalig ka koddi.” No paragas noulian ka boi to dalu din.
pilay
Di ko ogko-ongkoran ka sikan no ugpa-an, malinow on; warad otow, warad ogdinogon ta no ogkakagi.
‘Kono koy man ogbogoy,’ ka kagi to mgo dalaga no malayat so pogdoromdom dan, ‘su kulang man kanami ko ogtalaran kow. Hondio kow nasi to tindaan woy boli kow pa dio.’
gulub
Mo-ulung ka polì
maroyow
Du-on otow no nigparigus no nigtinugpù no nighun-a ka ulu rin no nabunggù ka li-og din su nakasungkul.
amanoloy
Ka ogsulat a to soini, og-iman-iman a to magaan a buwa ogpakapanumbaloy dio to kaniu.
taru
Duon dod duma no mgo otow no pigsusumpalit woy nigpambarasan. Ka duma pad, nigbanggutan to karina no inhatod dio to pirisuan.
Ko du-on otow no natila-an din, ogmologmologan din ka langlanguan ko sikandin ian.
bol-og
Nò, agad mohon-ing ki, ogkounawa to nasagboka kinow on no lawa su ligkat to nakakoon kinow on tibo to songo malison no paan.
Poglibuwas on woy ni Pedro, nanhondio sikandan to mgo duma ran no imbatbat dan on kandan ka insapad to mgo pogbuyagon woy ka mgo Labow to mgo Talagpanubad.
Nò, nigtabak ka mgo nalibulung no otow kuwo kandin. Kagi, “Naanad koy to Balaod ni Moisis to kono ogkamatoy ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan. Ko sikan ian, manio buwa to ignangon nu to igpaampow to krus ka Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan? Hontow buwa ka soin no Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan?”
Nò, pamminog kow koddi. Ko duon ogbuyuon now no ian ka ig-ampu nu dio to Magboboot, tuui now soini woy ogtinawo kow no ogbogayan kow on.”
Nigparagas to mgo inso din. “Duon mata now. Manio to kono kow ogpakakita? Duon talinga now. Manio to kono kow ogpakarinog?”
No to warad si Hisus, nigpanangnangonoy ka darua no lukos to, “Sikan buwa ian to dio ki pad to dalan no inat to nigsokol on so goinawa ta no nig-al-alukuy si Hisus kanta woy impasabut din kanta ka kalitukan to mgo kagi no ingkasulat dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot.”
Maro-ot ko’gkatugku
labid
No nigtabak a ki Hisus to, ‘Buyag, hontow ka?’ Kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag to, ‘Si Hisus a, no sikanak ka ogbaybayaran nud.
Dokad di duon mgo otow no maligal no waro nigtuu to innangon ni Pablo. Duon do to tangkaan to mgo otow no nalimud, nigdoot dan ka sikan no dalan to Magboboot. Sikan ian to nig–awo on si Pablo to anaranan to mgo Hudiu no nigduma rin ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no nighalin on dio to anaranan ni Tiranu.
Di pogkita to mgo talagbantoy to anak dut tagtuun, nigmal-alukuyoy sikandan no kagi ran, ‘Soini ka anak to tagtuun to pinamula no sikandin ian ka ogpakasoip to amoy rin. Oghimatayan tanow sikandin oyow kanta ka soini no pinamula rin.’
Pigsaparan ka nabutud to mohon-ing no mgo otow ko nig-umow. Di nasi nigpaagbotan din do no ogbabansagon. “Wow pinanganak ni Dabid, kohoy-ui a nu.”
tabakù
Untud nu?
Pogpitow to mgo boi ka noibatan ni Hisus, nigkagi ka diwata to, “Paragas kow oghondio to mgo hibatoon din woy nangoni now sikandan no nouyag on sikandin woy oghun-a on sikandin kaniu dio to Galilia. Dio now ogkitoon sikandin. Kono now ian kalingawi ka innangon ku kaniu,” kagi rin.
No, Buyag, ko ogkouyag on kun ka tibo no namatoy to sika allow no og-uyagon to Magboboot ka namatoy, hontow dapit to sika papitu no mataltalahari ka asawa to sika boi su kandan no papitu ka nokogsoipsoip nig-asawa kandin ko dini to soin no kalibutan.”
No ligkat dod to pogtuu to mgo pinanganak ni Israil dongan, ko nigpalpalibut sikandan to lunsud to Hiriku taman to papitu no allow, nayabyab on tibo ka alad no batu to sikan no lunsud.
Nig-inso sikandan ki Hisus to, “Maistru, kon-u ogkatuman ka soini no innangon nu kanami woy nokoy ka indanan kanami to magaan on ogkatuman ka sikan no innangon nu?”
Ian su nataga a to duon ian goinawa now to ogbulig. Sikan ka igkasayo-sayo ku dio to mgo nigtuu no mgo taga Masidonia su innangon ku kandan to, ligkat to ligad pad no tuid, sikaniu no nigtuu no dio to Girisia, tahan kow on nigtuud to duon igpaalap now dio to mgo nigtuu no taga Hudia. Nò mgo sulod, to pogdinog to mgo taga Masidonia to sikan no innangon ku, mohon-ing kandan ka songo nigboboot to ogbulig.
Ka otow no nigpamuyù to u-ud to mundù su oggulayon din woy nigpamupu to u-ud to katumbal.
poid
Kagi ni Dimitriu, “Kuntoon, igkasasow ta lagboy ka soini no talabau ta su ko igmaroot on to goinawa to mgo otow ka oghimuon ta, konad on ogboboli. Di kono no sikan do, di songo kuwo angkuwan ko warad on bali to soini no baloy no ampuanan ta ki Diana. Di ian ka mabantug no magboboot ta,” kagi. “Di mangkuwan buwa ko ogkaawo on ka bantug din. Kalogon do su si Diana ka ogsimboon to tibo no mgo taga Asia woy to tibo no otow kai to kalibutan.”
Ko koddi do ka ognangon to malogot ka kagi ku, kono kow ogpakatuu ko sagboka ku ro.
Duon dangob no otow no nigkagi to, ‘Nakaboli a to sampulu no baka no oglouyon ku pad su og-ol-ologan ku pad ko maroyow no ogdaru. Nangoni nu ro ka tagtuun to pagkoonan to kono a ogpakaamut to pagkoonan din.’
Woy og-ampu a oyow ogkatagaan now to dakol lagboy ka kabogbogan to Magboboot no ogpakabulig kanta no ogtuu kandin. No ian ka kono ogkatogkad no kabogbogan no
diwata
Ogkalabkalab ka hapuy.
tupak
hapun
“Ko malogot sikan,” kagi ni Hisus, “manio naan no pinabayo to Gimukud to Magboboot, nighingaranan ni Dabid ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan to Lagboy no Igbuyag din?”
Ko ogkalasing on ka otow, ogkatibuasan on ko ogpakagimata. Ogko-uli-an on; konad ogkalasing.
Duon dangob no pananglitan ni Hisus no innangon din to mgo hibatoon din to oyow og-ungod og-ampu sikandan woy to oyow kono dan ogkalingawan ka pog-iman-iman dan agad ko kono pad ogbogayan to Magboboot to ogbuyuon dan.
butbut
Daruwa no tuid ka pog–anad ni Pablo duon to baloy ni Tiranu. Sikan ian ka tibo no mgo taga Asia, agad ka Hudiu woy ka kono no Hudiu, nakarinog to kinagian to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.
No kagi to sikan no daruwa kuwo kandan to, “Sikaniu no mgo taga Galilia, manio to ungod kow oglonghag dio to langit to oglibong dod man si Hisus dini to tano? Ogkounawa ro ka pogbatun din no pigkita now ka lawa rin. No ko oglibong si Hisus kai to tano, songo sikan dod ka lawa rin no nigkita now.”
Malopot doka pog-aguanta ta to igkabaybayari. No ka Magboboot no layun ogkohoy-u kanta, ian ka oghogot to pogtuu ta kandin woy ogliwan to dayagang ta. Woy ogmanokalon din ka goinawa ta oyow kono ogkawoil. Sikandin ka ogbogoy kanta to tibo no awoson ta. No nighimu kinow no mgo anak din oyow ogkatalaran kinow to karoyawon din no waro katamanan no ogligkat to nasagboka kinow on ki Kristu.
pusil
lukilom
sakmag
Di soini ka intabak din kanak. Kagi, “Litos on koykow su ian nu ro og-awoson ka igkohoy-u ku koykow, su ko malotoy ka, ogkakitaan lagboy ka kanak no kabogbogan.” Sikan ian, mgo sulod, ogkarago a nasi ko duon igmalotoy ku su oyow ogkabuligan a to kabogbogan ni Hisu Kristu.
Du-on nigbalak kanami to nigdatong koy diò to songo ugpa-an.
gowgow
No ka sikan, naayun on to tahan no ingkasulat to kinagian to Magboboot tongod ki Hisus to: “Ko nabatun sikandin dio to Langit, nigduma rin ka mohon-ing no naroog din. Woy duon mgo imbogoy rin to mgo sakup din.”
Ka kinabo ni Huan, naabol to bulbul to ayam no oghingaranan to kamil woy ka nagangu no laplap to ayam ka inhimu to holon din. Ian igkouyag din ka mgo talangas woy tonob.
Kalugnus ki.
soluton
baliok
pungos
dakol
No ogpangumawon dan ka mgo bubungan woy ka mgo gatung no ogpohoy-uhoy-u, no ogkagi to, “Tobali koy su oyow kono koy ogkitoon to sikan Lagboy no Igbuyag no ogpinpinnuu to pinnuuanan din to pandatuan woy oyow kono koy ogkoumaan
Di waro mataga ka sikan no nabawian on ko hontow ka ngaran to nigsugu kandin su niglonus si Hisus su mohon-ing so mgo otow no nalibulung dio.
Magbobo-otnGod
Ko oglaklakalan ki, og-awoson ta no og-inum ki to woig.
Duon pad boni no nakasawod dio to sapiniton. Songo ogtulin poron ka homoy di nigbodboran on dut dugion no bunal no noomus on.”
gapù
Warò nigdagkot ka pa-a ta to simintu.
doyow
panoy
ko-onon
Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus. “Sagboka ro ka tipaka taman to og-ulugon on dio to diralom to tano. Ogkamolu ka luiton woy oglibuwas ka mata no ogtubu on woy ogtuga soini.
Ka soini no sulat, nigligkat kanak no si Pablo. Uripon a to Magboboot woy suguanon a ni Kristu. Pigsugu a to oyow ogkohirosonan ka pogtuu to mgo otow no pig-abin to Magboboot no ogtuu kandin, woy to oyow ogkohirosonan ka katagaanan dan to pog-anad to tu-tuu ian no tinuuan ta.
gusì
No pigtuman din on kai to kanta no mgo pinanganak dan su nig–uyag din on si Hisus ligkat to kamatayon din. Ka sikan, nig–ayun to sikan no ingkasulat dongan to sikan no igkaruwa no Salmos to kagi to Magboboot to: ‘Anak ku sikoykow. No kuntoon, igpatokod ku to sikanak ka Amoy nu.’
kiskis
Ko og-ingol, ogko-iniat no ogduma to inoy.
bohog
gakapan
doow
taban
Mgo sulod, ogparoromdom ku sikaniu to oyow ogdoroyow kow. Indani now ko hondoi longod no mgo otow ka oghimu to samuk woy ka ogpasuwoy to pogtuu to duma ran, woy ka og-atu to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon no ingkaanad kaniu. Kono kow ogdumaruma to sikan no mgo otow,
tukbung
Kagi ran buwa to, ‘Soin no otow no, kono ogpakaponga to nigbunsuran din!’
Nigkagi pa ni Hisus no kagi rin, “Kaniu man, hipanow kow dio to Pagkoonan. Di sikoddi atag, kona a pad ogduma kaniu su waro pad mokouma ka litos no allow ku no oghondio.”
No, si Tomas no oghingaranan dan to soping ka songo duma ran no tahan no hibatoon ni Hisus. Waro naka-amut si Tomas dio ko nigpakita si Hisus to duma no hibatoon din.
Kagi ni Maria, “Ogsayoon ku ka Magboboot ku to tibo no goinawa ku,
libut-libut
tongkok
Ka mgo Labow to mgo Talagpanubad to sikan no ampuanan no kai to tano, ian naabin to oyow igbogoy ran dio to Magboboot ka tibo no igbogoy to mgo otow woy ka mgo ayam no ogpohimatayan no igtubad. Sikan ian to, ka kanta Labow no Igbuyag to Talagpanubad, songo duon igbogoy rin to Magboboot.
Ian su duon otow no nignangon to, ‘Ka goinawa ta, ogligkat dio to kandin, woy sikan ian to ogpakawoilwoil ki woy to ogpakaroromdom ki woy to nohimu kid on no otow.’ Woy duon mougsob no mgo otow dio to kaniu no nignangon to, ‘Anak kinow rod to Magboboot.’
lipak
lugit
Nigparagas no nigkagi si Hisus to, “Songo nigdinog now ka in-anad dongan to kaap-apuan tanow no ko duon otow no ogbuturon din ka mata to duma rin, awoson no songo ogkabutud sikandin. Woy ko duon otow no ogpakalupu to ngipon to duma din, awoson no songo ogkalupu ka kandin no ngipon.
Nigkagi si Pedro to, “Buyag, ko malogot no sikoykow ian, pohipanawa a nu bag duon to laplap to woig.”
todtod
dua
Nig-insaan din ka mgo suguonon ko kon-u buwa noulii. Nigtabak sikandan to, “Gabii no ogkolis nabolow on ka lawa rin.”
Nanhipanow si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din no ogtakorog dio to lunsud to Hirusalim. Nigparapig din ka mgo hibatoon din no nignangonan din sikandan to,
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to, “Agad hondoi no lunsud ka oghondian now, ko kono ogpamminogon to mgo otow ka nangnangonon now, libuwas kow dio to taliwaro to sikan no lunsud no kagii now sikandan to,
Di si Dabid, nigtuman din ka sugu to Magboboot to kandin no pog–ugpo nataman do to kandin no pogkamatoy. Pogkaponga, no inlobong dan on ka lawa rin dio to longod to mgo lobong to mgo apu din no namolu on ka kandin no lawa.
Ka pogpitow to mata ku, konò kud ogkamolmologan
busow
Kagi rin, “Sika otow no ogsagmanon din ka bato no ogkounawa to soin no bato su ka goinawa rin koddi, sikoddi ka ogsagmanon din. No ko hontow ka ogsagman koddi, kono no sikoddi do ka ogsagmanon din; songo ogsagmanon din dod ka Magboboot no nigsugu koddi.”
Ko napongaan on to nigsalaub woy ka kogos din, tag sagboka no sundalu ka nigdani ki Hisus no ogsumpalit do duon to tahud dan. Kagi ran, “Kumusta ka, Labow to Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu!” woy nigtagpi dan ka langlanguwan din.
Woy waro a nighondio to Hirusalim no ogpabulig to sikan no an-anayan no mgo suguanon ni Hisus. Di nighondio a atag to Arabia no ugpaan. Pogkalugoy, niglibong ad dio to lunsud to Damasku.
No kagi ni Agripa ki Pistu to, “Ogkoiniat a porom no ogpamminog ki Pablo.” Kagi ni Pistu to, “Asolom kad ogpamminog kandin.”
Og-ikulon ta ka komos ko hondo-i ogtangkò.
asat
Nò, ian to impananglitan ku ka sikan to uripon su oyow malomu now to pogsabut. Nokani, nounawa to nouripon kow to mgo maroot no koiniatan now no imbogoy now ka lawa now no igtuman to agad nokoy no maroot no batasan. No ka sikan no batasan, ungod natimtimulan. Di kuntoon, og-awoson to igbogoy now ka tibo no lawa now no igtuman to sikan no batasan no maroyow ro to tangkaan to Magboboot.
ma-an
Ko nakarinog on ka mgo hibatoon ni Huan bahin to soini, nanhondio to pirisuan no nig-angoy ran on ka lawa rin no insabal dan on.
Pogkaponga ran to nigpitow, nan-uli on sikandan no nigpanagana on to mgo mohomut no mgo igdamuwas dan to lawa ni Hisus no namatoy. Di nighimoloy pad sikandan to allow to Sabaru su ian Allow ran to Oghimoloy woy to og-ampu unawa to innangon to Balaod dan.
Di kuntoon, sasindog kad on, su ian tuud ku to nigpakita a koykow kuntoon su nig–alam ku sikoykow to suguanon ku. No ian su oyow igpamalogot nu ka sikan no nigkita nu no nighimu ku, woy to sikan no igpapitow ku koykow uromo.
batuk
agpot
dabakdabak
opus
Ko du-on mgo batò no ogko-on no moon-ing ka ogkoko-ulug no mgo ko-onon diò to so-og, ogmanda-atda-at to ko-onon.
Di ka otow no waro tagui ka goinawa rin to Gimukud to Magboboot, kono ogkoiniat to sikan no ogligkat to Gimukud din su nahan dan no waro pulus. Woy kono ogpakasabut sikandan su ka Gimukud do to Magboboot ka ogpakapasabut kanta to sikan.
No ian su ka tibo no impanangon to sikan no Tahan no Kasulatan, nigligkat to Magboboot no duon pulus ko og-anad ki, ko ogsapad ki, ko og-udling ki woy ko og-anaron ta ka mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisus ko nokoy ka matuwarong on no mgo batasan ta.
“Hoo ian,” ka tabak ni Pedro, “Ogbayad sikandin.” Poglopow ni Pedro dio to baloy, nokohun-a si Hisus no nigkagi. Kagi rin to, “Duon og-inso ku koykow Simon. Nokoy ka pogdoromdom nu to soini? Kai to tano, hontow ka ogbayad to buhis dut mgo datu to mgo ugpaan? Ka mgo anak dan woy ko dangob no mgo otow?”
Nakitaan dan sikandin di wa dan tokora to si Hisus ian.
To nig-ampu pad si Hisus kandan nig-ongkoran din on sikandan woy nigbatun on dio to Langit.
Ka maistra woy ka maistru, sikandan ka talag-anad to mgo istudianti.
Ian su, agad to nounawa kinow to mgo nammatoy ligkat to waro kinow pad nigpaagad-agad kandin, di ko nig-uyag din on si Kristu ligkat to kamatayon din, nounawa to ingkalagkos kinow rin oyow songo ogkabogayan kinow to kouyagan ta no waro katamanan. Ka pogkohoy-u to Magboboot, ian impangabang kanta to mgo salo ta.
Ian su ko naawo pa ka mgo salo dan ligkat to ingkatubad dan, warad on porom igmasakit to goinawa ran to sikan no mgo salo dan. No konad on porom og-awoson no oghutukhutuk to duon oghimatayan no igtubad.
Agpas ka hondii to kono pad no tig-uran. Si Eubulu, si Prudinti, si Linu, si Klaudia, woy ka tibo no nigtuu ki Hisus no kai og-ugpo, igpanangon koykow to ogdoromdomon dan sikoykow.
Pasalubung to bolad.
Nò, sikaniu no duon maroyow no ulu now, sumsumana now ka ignangon ku kaniu.
Kono tad ogdakolon ka goinawa ta to mgo batasan to mgo otow no waro nigtuu to Magboboot kai to ampow to soini no kalibutan woy kono kid ogkoiniat to mgo ogkoiniatan dan no kono on litos to Magboboot. Ian su ka otow no ogdakolon ka goinawa rin to mgo batasan woy mgo koiniatan to mgo otow no waro nigtuu kai to soini no kalibutan, waro goinawa rin to Magboboot.
Di waro makasabut woy si Maria to kagi ni Hisus kandan ko nokoy ka kalitukan.
Nahan now no nalasing koy di waro koy man malasing, su kono pad man ogtinlasing kuntoon to nokoy naan alas nuibi pad to masolom.
Kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Dii kow on, oglom-ag kinow.” Di waro agad sagboka no hibatoon din no niglangob nig-inso to “Hontow ka?” Nataga ian to sikandin ka Lagboy no Igbuyag dan no si Hisus.
Ka otow no ogkolopon, oghagsilon su nigdaralu to malaria sikandin.
hag-ut
Sosolobon ka ig-ambò.
No sikanta no ogtuu ki Hisu Kristu, waro ki mabogayi to katouanan no ogligkat to mgo otow to soini no kalibutan, di nigbogayan kinow atag to Gimukud to Magboboot oyow ogpakasabut kinow on to tibo no igbogoy to Magboboot kanta.
bantang
Tibo nigsuwoy. Tibo nakasalo. Waro agad sagboka no oghimu to maroyow.
Ko du-on masakit to bo-bò ta, og-om-om ki to woig no du-on asin.
Nò, su nigpasaylu rin on ka mgo salo ta, konad on og-awoson to duon pad oghimatayan ta no igpanubad no ig-awo poron to mgo salo.
Ka otow no ogbanta-an ka ogpakamot no nigkuò pad to hom-om no otow to asolom on ogto-od ka ogpakamot kandin.
No nignangonan a man do to sikan no diwata to Magboboot to, “Ka mgo woig no nigkita nu no nigpinpinnuuan to sikan no boi no maroot so batasan din, ian ka nigkaloinloin no mgo kapunganan woy to mgo kot-ot-otowan woy to ogkaloinloin no mgo ugpaan woy to mgo kinagian.
pilot
Mgo sulod, karago kow ro ko ogkoumaan kow to mohon-ing no mgo igkabaybayari now
sapon
Nigligad pad ka tatolu no tuid woy a nighondio to Hirusalim oyow ogpanumbaloy a ki Pedro. No dio a nig-ugpo to kandin to sampulu woy lalimma no allow.
Nò, ka nakalibuwas koy on to kohirapi, nakagakap koy on dio to pantad, woy nignangonan koy to Malta ka ngaran to sikan no pulu.
Nataga ki to, ka sikan no mgo Hudiu, ko duon igpanubad dan no igpaawo poron to salo dan, ka langosa to sikan no ayam, og-alapon to Labow to mgo Talagpanubad dio to sikan no Kinaroyawon no Sinabong no duon to solod to ampuanan dan. Di ka lawa to sikan no igtubad dan, ogsilaban dan dio to libuwasan to lunsud dan.
Nò, igpasolod dan poron si Pablo to baloy to mgo sundalu di nigkagian ni Pablo ka igbuyag dan to kinagian to Ginirigu to, “Ogkoiniat ka porom ko duon ignangon ku koykow.” Kagi to kapitan ki Pablo to, “Ogkatou ka nanaan to kinagian to Ginirigu?
toytoy
No ka mgo igbuyag dio to Ehipto, nakaliwanliwan on taman to duon on igbuyag no waro mataga ko hontow si Husi.
tulang
Sikan ian no nigparalapak ni Hisus ka tibo no mgo hibatoon din woy nignangon din to, “Natagaan now no ka mgo labow no igbuyag no konon mgo Hudiu ogpandoogon do ka mgo otow ran. Woy ka mgo igbuyag dan ungoron dan ogsugua ka mgo otow no waro katondanan.
sagdok
Lagboy on ian no narago sikandan woy noinuinu di inat to duon dod limang no goinawa ran to kono buwa si Hisus ka duon. Di to oglimanglimang pad ka goinawa ran, kagi ni Hisus, “Og-inso a kaniu ko duon buwa ogkakoon now kai?”
Malogot ian soini su kono ogligkat to koddi no goinawa ka kagi ku. Ka Magboboot no Amoy ku no nigsugu a rin, kandin ka nigsugu to nokoy ka ogkagion ku.”
To niglopow on si Hisus dio to baloy, nigduug kandin ka darua no nabbutud no otow woy nig-insaan ni Hisus sikandan no nigkagi to, “Ogtuu kow buwa no ogbawian ku ka mgo mata now?”
Naan now buwa to kono now og-awoson no ogpaagad-agad to kinagian to Magboboot su ogsalig kow to mohoy-uon sikandin no mananoy rin oglogpari ka mgo otow. Di nataga kow poron to ian to ogkohoy-uan ki to Magboboot su oyow ogsonditan woy og-ongkoran tad on poron ka mgo batasan ta no maroot.
sinogow
Songo og-awoson to oggogongonan din ka tu-tuu ian no tinuuan no in-anad noy tongod ki Hisus su oyow ka sikan no pogbuyagon, ogkaayun to og-os-osonon din ka mgo otow ligkat to sikan no tu-tuu ian no tinuuan woy to oyow ogpakatabak sikandin to mgo otow no og-atu to soini no tu-tuu ian no tinuuan oyow ogpakasabut sikandan to sayop dan.
Nokoy no igbabayad koykow?
pannig-a
Sikan ian to nataga ki to dakoldakol pad ka kabogbogan no ogpakalagkos to sikan no oghimuon to Gimukud to Magboboot.
Nò, duon duma no mgo Parisiu woy ka duma no mgo Sadusiu no nanhondio ki Hisus su ogkoiniatan dan no og-ol-ologan si Hisus. Nò, nigbuyu dan to oghimuon ni Hisus ka songo koinuinuan no ian ka indanan kandan to duon kabogbogan din puun to Magboboot.
pa-a
Aw ka!
Igsanggat ku to bibig to liang
Ka alongaping, ian ka ogbo-ot to og-alap to lawa to sikan no ngalap.
thenA, nokoy na-an bulung ta?
Ko sikanak, litos porom no ogpakaboot a to oghimuon ku su suguanon a man ni Hisus woy nakakita a kandin no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy su nigtuu kow on kandin su ligkat to innangonnangon ku kaniu. No sikaniu ka igpapitow ku to nigtuman kud on ka insugu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta kanak.
Di kagi to mgo otow to, “Nangog ka ra!” Di nigbaghot to nigkagi ni Roda to, “Tu–tuu ian to si Pedro ian ka duon.” Kagi to mgo otow, “Diwata buwa to Magboboot no ogbantoy kandin.”
ilom
Ka sikan ian, ogkounawaan ka nohimu ki Hisus su nighimatayan sikandin dio to libuwasan to lunsud. No ka langosa rin, ian ka ogpakaawo to salo to mgo otow kai to kalibutan.
Pogkaponga, nighipanow on ka igbuyag dan, di duon mgo otow rin no waro goinawa ran to sika no igbuyag. Nigsugu dan ka pila buwa no mgo otow no impasundul dan kandin dio to sikan no mariu no ugpaan su ko diad on, ognangonan ka punuan dio to, ‘Kono koy ogkoiniat ko sikandin ka Labow no Igbuyag noy.’ ”
no
ganti
Wà ki matalari
duluc
Nò, nigtongtongan ni Pablo ka mgo pogbuyagon, no kagi rin to, “Mgo sulod no pinanganak ni Israil, maawang ka goinawa ku to Magboboot su taman kuntoon, nig–ayad–ayad ad to ogpaagad–agad kandin.”
lumpas
Si Hisus ka imbogoy to Magboboot to oyow ogkamatoy sikandin no igtobus to mgo salo ta. Woy sikandin dod ka nig-uyag to Magboboot to oyow ogkohimu kinow on no maroyow dio to tangkaan din.
Og-anaron ta ka mgo otow no ogtuu to, og-awoson ta to kono ki oghimu to waro pulus di ogpoomotan ta no oghimu to maroyow oyow ogkabuligan ta ka mgo otow no og-awoson lagboy to duon ogbulig kandan.
Ogkohoy-uan do ian ka tibo no mgo otow to soin no kalibutan to duon mgo ogpasaligkat kandan to pogtuu ran koddi. Tahan do ian to ogkoumaan kow to mgo igtintal to pogtuu now di koid-uan ian ka agad hontow no ligkatan to mgo igpasaligkat.
Nò, pamminog kow to soini. Ka mgo ubaton no og-abin to Hudiu sikandan woy nahan dan no sakup sikandan to Magboboot, dokad di sakup atag ni Satanas sikandan. Uromo, ogpaluhuron ku sikandan dio to tangkaan now su oyow ogkatagaan dan to indakoli ku sikaniu to goinawa ku.
daddakol
Hondio kow ro to mgo duma ta, no ian ka mgo pinanganak ni Israil su ogkounawa sikandan to mgo ayam no oghingaran to karniru no nallagak.
lususud
No, ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy ka mgo Parisiu, nigsugu dan ka mgo otow to ogpanangon kandan ko ogkitoon dan si Hisus su oyow ogdakopon dan porom.
subul
Woy ampui now ka mgo labow no igbuyag woy ka agad hontow no ogpakaalap to dakol no katondanan oyow maroyow ka pog-ugpo ta no waro samuk, woy to oyow waro ogpakaatang kanta to ogtuman ta to ogkoiniatan to Magboboot woy to oyow maroyow so mgo batasan ta to tibo no otow.
gopot
Ogkarago kow ka ogman-ugpo dio to langit. Di sikaniu no ogpokougpo to tano woy dio to dagat, kohoy-u kow ro ian lagboy su nakalogsad si Satanas duon to kaniu. Nabolu lagboy sikandin su natagaan din to malopot naan doka allow rin no igliwak din to oghimu to maroot dio to mgo otow.”
ilob
To oghihipanow si Hisus dio to sika malayat no balkon to Ampuanan dan no oghingaranan to Balkon ni Solomon no
Woy duon mgo otow no nahan dan ko si Alihandro buwa ka ogligkatan to samuk su duon mgo Hudiu no impatangko kandin to mgo otow. No nigkamoy on ni Alihandro oyow oghagtong on ka ogkakagi su duon porom ignangon din.
limu-mù
lokang
papasan
dalong
tingkal
Nò, ka mgo Hudiu woy ka kono no Hudiu no taga Episu, tibo nanangonan to noomonu, woy nanahallok on. Nigsayo dan on ka ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.
Duon dod dangob no kagi rin tongod ki Hisus no songo ingkasulat dongan. Kagi rin to, “Talagpanubad kad on taman to waro katamanan no ogkounawa to pogpanubad ni Milkisidik dongan.”
mangapol
Kagi ran kuwo kandin, “Pigmonu ka rin to pigbawi to mata nu?”
Nigbalikid si Pedro no nigkita rin ka sikan no dangob no hibatoon no ogluyud no marani to poka ran. Sikandin ian no dakol so goinawa ni Hisus no nig-inso kud ki Hisus to sikan no poglabung dan ko hontow ka ogtabod kandin.
Kuntoon, mgo sulod, ogtabakon ku pad ka mgo inso now no insulat now kanak. Nig-inso kow ko maroyow ko ogpangasawa ki woy ko kono. Maroyow ko kono ki ogpangasawa.
Agad to tibo kandan noumaan on to kamatayon dan to waro moumoi to sikan no innangon to Magboboot kandan, di waro dan ongkori ka pogtuu ran to Magboboot. Di, ligkat to pogtuu ran, narago nasi sikandan su nakitaan dan dio to mariu ka igbogoy to Magboboot kandan uromo, woy nigtokod to mgo agpot do sikandan no waro tu-tuu no ugpaan dan kai to soi tano.
Og-alukuyon ungod ka amoy taman to ogho-o on.
Malogot ka ogkagion ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “to kono pad man ogkoubus ogkamatoy ka tibo no mgo otow no ogkabuhi kuntoon woy ogkohimu ka innangon ku kaniu.
mata to aldow
“Nignangonan koy ni Kornilio to duon diwata to Magboboot no niglibuwas kandin dio to baloy rin. No nigkagi ka diwata kandin to, ‘Alam ka to mgo lukos no ogsuguon nu dio to Hupi oyow og–angayon dan si Simon no ian angga din no si Pedro.
toy-ow
ganat
su ogkaroromdom ku ka pogbulig now kanak no nig-anad a to mgo otow to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu ligkat to kabinunsuran to pogtuu now kandin taman kuntoon.
korow
Ogtuluyon din
tulis
Sui-atan a
Ka diò to Sulit, Langilan, Banuwaloy, Kapugi, Pipisan, sikan ka ogkaganuy ran no kinagian.
sosolobon
paspas
Poko-untud koy to karoyawan
Ogbuyu a kandin to oyow ogkapulasan on ka pogdoromdom now oyow ogkatagaan now on ian ka tibo no ogkoim-imanan tanow su nohimu kinow on no mgo sakup din. Woy ogbuyu a to oyow ogkatagaan now ian lagboy ka sikan no karoyawon no insabut to Magboboot no igbogoy rin uromo to mgo sakup din.
sanggat
Di nataga si Hisus dio to goinawa rin to ogmugongmugong ka mgo sakup din bahin to sikan no in-anad din. Nò, nig-inso din kandan to, “Nakabalabag buwa to pogtuu now ka soini no innangon kud?
lagandang
Woy pad ogpokouma ka mohuri no allow awoson ko oghun-a ignangonnangon ka Maroyow no Nangnangonon to tibo no koot-otawan.”
Ogtawalang ka nati ko oghikotan.
Nigbogoy a kaniu to panag-ilingan oyow oghimuon now soini no pighimu kud kaniu.
Kai atag sokia.
Oghun-a a ogpurut to kuddò nu no asolom ka pad on  oghondiò to baloy ku no og-insò ko du-on igbayad ku.
Nò, pogpitow ku no duon dakol no kuligi no oglayanglayang dio to aw-awangan. No nigpaagbotan to nigkagi to, “Kalogon do, kalogon do, kalogon do to tibo no mgo otow no og-ugpo to kalibutan no ogkasalanganan on to poghiup to sikan no mohuri no diwata to Magboboot.”
bagdak
lawag
Ka otow no oghipanow ungod ogpakoddol ka oghipanow.
tonong
Ogpamminog sikandan to agad hontow no og-anad di kono ogpakatokod no ogpakasabut sikandan ko hondoi no longod ka tu-tuu ian.
timpung
No nigtabak si Hisus kandin to, “Malogot ian ka ogkagion ku koykow. Kuntoon do no allow ogpakaruma ka koddi dio to Langit.”
tol-ob
nikaniu
No ko dio a to sikan no ugpaan, duon narinog ku no kono ogkaayunan to oglituk. Di ko ignangon ku poron, kono igpanangon to Magboboot.
No ka soini igmalogot kanta to duon imbogoy to Magboboot kanta to kouyagan ta no waro katamanan. No ka sikan no kouyagan ta, ogligkat to Anak din.
Poghagtong on to samuk to mgo otow, nigpalimud on ni Pablo ka mgo nigtuu ki Hisus no nig–os–osonan din sikandan. Pogkaponga, nighipanow on si Pablo no oghondio to probinsia to Masidonia.
abolongan
Magolgol to piak ka kabugkul.
Ogkaallok ki ko ogka-antual ka batò no ogbalintu-ad.
Kagi ni Pablo kandan to, “Og–inso a kaniu, ka nigtuu kow, nigsolod ka Gimukud to Magboboot dio to goinawa now?” Kagi to mgo otow to, “Waro koy nangoni ko duon Gimukud to Magboboot.”
bokad
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ogmog-ogotoy matag sagboka no ugpaan woy ka loin no ugpaan. Agad ka mgo sundalu to sagboka no igbuyag woy ka sundalu to loin, mabunbunuoy.
Pogpurut din to sikan no ogbasoon, ka sikan no hop-at no hinimu woy ka kawaan woy hop-at no mgo pogbuyagon, nigluhud dio to tangkaan to sikan no Nati no Karniru oyow ogsimboon dan sikandin. Tag sagboka kandan, duon maroyow no ogparagingon no oghingaranan to alpa. Woy songo duon mgo boung no nanapunu to moomut no igtotomog. Ka ngarog to sikan no obol no moomut, ian ka ig-indan to mgo pog-ampu to mgo sakup to Magboboot.
Sikan ian to agad nokoy no allow, ogkohimu no ogkapangabangan din ka agad hontow no ogbayo kandin no ogdani to Magboboot. Ian su waro katamanan to pogkouyag ni Hisus no ogpakabulig to mgo otow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.
Ko waro ogkitoon din no ugpaan din dio, kagi rin dio to goinawa rin to, ‘Ian do koddi to oglibong a dio to tahan no ugpaan ku.’ No oglibong sikandin dio to sikan no otow. Ko ogkitoon din ka tahan no ugpaan din no maroyow on no ogkounawa to baloy no maawang on woy natapid,
Dokad di ko kai ki pad to soini no tano, ogpakaalooy kinow su ligkat to duon mgo igkohirapi ta, ogkoiniatan tad to ogkabogayan kid on to igliwan to sikan no iam no lawa ta no ogligkat to langit
Ko du-on batò no in-anak diò to awayan no nig-ongkoran to inoy, nig-ang-angga-an din on.
Ka miow no magintalunan, tahan dò no diò to koilawan no og-ugpò. Daddakol atag.
Woy duon buwa ka ogkagi to, “Ian nohimu, ka koonon su igsolod to tukuwan ta, no, ian to nohimu ka tukuwan ta oyow ogsoloran to koonon.” Hoo, di uromo, oghipongaan on to Magboboot ka pulus to sikan no daruwa. Ka soi lawa ta, kono atag no litos to oghimu ki to maroot su ian do no litos no oghimuon ka pog-unug ta to tibo no goinawa to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu oyow ogkasayo ta sikandin. No sikandin ka ogkannugun kanta.
pi-ot
Pogpangumusta ni Pablo kandan, imbatbat din kandan ka tibo no nohimu to Magboboot no nig–anad sikandin dio to nabayaan din no mgo ugpaan to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu.
buyag
Doka ogtugon; lunsud ka.
limbas
Nò, tigbal do no ogliwaro on to karusiloman, nig–ampu si Pablo daruwa ki Silas woy nigkanta to ogsayoon dan ka Magboboot. No ka duma no nanapirisu, namminog kandan.
tulì
Di ko duon otow no nigtuu ki Hisus di kono ogtanudtanud to mgo sulod din no ogkohirapan no ogpakasalig poron kandin, woy lagboy ko kono din ogsagmanon ka marani rin lagboy, noongkoran din ka pogtuman din to pogtuu rin. Madmaroyow pa kandin ka mgo otow no wa mogtuu no ogsagman atag to karumaan din.
Nigtabak si Pedro kandan to, “Og–awoson no tag sagboka kaniu, ogsonditan now woy og-ongkoran now on ka mgo batasan now no maroot woy ogpabautismuan kow on to ngaran ni Hisu Kristu. No og–awoon din on ka mgo salo now woy ogbogayan kow on to Gimukud to Magboboot.
tibolus
bukus
Ian su oyow ka duma no mgo otow kai to kalibutan, lagkos to kono no Hudiu no og–alap to ngaran ku, ogpakadoromdom to Lagboy no Igbuyag dan.
Baluy no kabal so tingkalusan.
bingù
liklik
Sikan ian, parumaa now kanak ka mgo igbuyag now. No ko duon nohimu ni Pablo no maroot, litos to ogbayungan dan sikandin dio,” kagi ni Pistu.
Titimbang si Buliung dut buyag to gakit.
Kono ka ogligal ko oghuliran ka to asawa nu. Woy ro buwa no litos ko kono kow ogpohulhuliroy ko ogpasabsabutoy kow pad oyow duon liwak now to og-ampu. Di magaan kow ro og-uli dio to asawa now oyow kono kow ogkaayat ni Satanas to oghimu to maroot to dangob no otow no ogligkat to kono kow buwa ogpakaponod to goinawa now.
Kono now oglomotomi sikandin. No ko oghipanow on, buligi now sikandin oyow ogkarago so goinawa rin no ogpokouli kai to kanak su ogtagaran ku sikandin woy ka ogduma kandin no nigtuu.
Napolaan ad to batasan nu no anoy kad ogkalasing.
Sikan ian, ka duma no mgo Hudiu no nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to Antiokia, agad to tibo, lagkos ki Pedro, nataga to kono no litos ka nighimu rin, tibo nigdalong on to poghimu ni Pedro. Agad si Birnabi, songo naalap on to poghimu ran.
Di nataga a to naalap ad on dio to maroyow lagboy no ugpaan ni Hisu Kristu. No oghutuk a pad no ognangon to waro a mataga ko to sikan no pogkaalap ku, nakalagkos ka lawa ku woy ko ka gimukud ku ro buwa ka naalap. Ka Magboboot do ka nataga.
Pitow kow ko songo monu karakol ka bantug ni Milkisidik. Su agad si Abraham no ian bantuganon no kaap-apuan tanow, imbogoy rin ki Milkisidik ka igkasampulu no baad to mgo noutol din to sikan no gira.
“Hondini ka,” kagi ni Hisus. Niglibuwas si Pedro ligkat to balutu no nigbunsud nighipanow on to laplap to woig pohondio ki Hisus.
Marani on ogpokouma ka pagkoonan to mgo Hudiu no oghingaranan to Pagkoonan to Paligad.
Nò, mgo sulod, to kanak no doromdom, lagboy no maroyow ko ogparagason now ka sikan no nigbunsuran now to soini no nigligad no tuid. Di ka sikan, waro nigligkat to pogtuman now su nigligkat atag to igkoiniat now.
Oglinob ka allow.
Di woy ogkatuman on ka tibo no soini no innangon ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “ogpandakopon kow to mgo otow no ogbaybayaran kow ran. Ogpohondion kow rod to tangkaan to mgo igbuyag to mgo anaranan to mgo og-ampu oyow ogbobootan kow woy ogkapirisu kow. Lagkos, ogpohondio kow to mgo labow no mgo igbuyag woy dio to tangkaan to mgo datu, su ligkat to pogtuu now koddi,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ogkounawa rod ka Amoy ta no dio to langit, su kono din ogkoiniatan ko duon sagboka to soini no mgo bato no ogkalagak.
Ian ku ignangon to sikan su ka tibo no ogkaalam no mgo Labow to mgo Talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu, ogligkat to mgo otow. No ian to ogkaalam oyow ogpataliwaro kandan to Magboboot. No sikandan ka ogbogoy to Magboboot ka sikan no igpabogoy to mgo otow woy ka igpanubad no mgo ayam no ighusoy to mgo salo to mgo otow.
tingangag
tibug
bonsaran
Ko ogbugsi on ka bulutut, ogsolug to langosa ka nanò din.
Di soini no kalasi no busow woy ro ogpakarogil ko pinabayo to mgo pog-ampu now dio to Magboboot woy oglagkos to oglangkad to ogkoon oyow og-ampu. Sikan do ian ka igpakarogil to sikan no busow, waro loin.”
Kara allow, bogayi koy to koonon noy no og-awosonon noy.
Nigparagas si Hisus no nigkagi to mgo otow to, “Nò, ko kai pad to kaniu si Huan niglangkad to nigkoon sikandin woy waro nig-inum to inumanon, no nigkagi to tibo no mgo otow to pigbusawan sikandin.
di
su marusilom oghirogo ka mgo otow no ogkokoirogo, woy marusilom dod ogkalasing ka mgo otow no ogpanlalasing.
No soini ian ka ogkoiniatan to Magboboot kaniu, to waro solug no maroot to batasan now woy to oyow waro agad sagboka kaniu no ogpanhilabot to kono no asawa now.
Ko ogkaawo on ka ogpakaatang kandin, ogpakitoon ka sikan no talaglop-ang to Balaod. Di ko ogpokouma on ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, no si Hisus, oghimatayan din on ka sikan no otow ligkat to kabogbogan to layag din, no oghiupon din do no ogkamatoy on woy ogkoubus on no ogkaawo ka katondanan din.
Ko nigdinog ni Hisus ka kagi to sikan no nigsugu, kagi rin, “Kono no igkamatoy ni Lasaru ka soini no dalu rin; sikan do ian oyow ogkitoon ka kabogbogan to Magboboot. Woy pinabayo to soini, koddi no Anak din, songo ogsayoon a.”
dangow
Ka otow no nasundug koddi, songo nasundug ka Amoy ku.
Waro agad nokoy no koonon to otow no ogpakaligsom kandin no otow oyow kono ogpakatangko to Magboboot. Di ka kagi no ogpuun to goinawa no maroot ka ogpakaligsom to otow oyow kono ogpakatangko to Magboboot.
Ka sikan no paan, ian ogkounawaan ka pogtuu now ki Hisus. No ka sikan no igpatulin, ian ogkounawaan ka mgo salo now. No og-awoson to ogpan-ongkoran now ka tibo no maroot oyow waro solug no maroot no ian now porom ogkounawaan ka iam no paan no waro amuti to igpatulin. Di nataga a to ogkounawa kow to sikan no paan su namatoy on si Kristu no igtobus to mgo salo ta. Sikandin, ian ogkounawaan ka karniru no ogpohimatayan ta ko allow to Pagkoonan to Paligad.
halin
aus
lagong
Na-antog ka lapinid to nabus-ugan to woig no pigsogod si Elena.
nanoy
biak
Maroyow lagboy dio to Magboboot ka pighimu to tibo to soini no mgo otow ligkat to pogtuu ran. Di waro dan pad mapurut ka sikan no innangon to Magboboot.
No nakasinogow sikandan tibo no nambakus ki Pablo woy nigharokan dan sikandin.
Pogkaponga to sikan, duon man do nigkita ku no dangob no diwata to Magboboot no niglogsad ligkat to langit. Duon dakol no kabogbogan din, no ka tibo no kalibutan, nabat-awan to kandin no kalayagi.
ubus
Ka mo-ilom no kibol, ko ogmapotì on, oglugsù on ka uran.
olot
Ka sikan no innangon ku kaniu, og-unug to tahan no nangnangonon no ingkaanad kaniu an-anayan to og-awoson ta to ogkohoy-uan ta ka mgo duma ta.
Ko du-on ogsugu-on ta no otow no ogpabolion to asin no maragas oglibong. Takas to ogboboli, ogbalikid on to og-ulì.
di ka tol-ob ka nagongonan dan no nigpallaguy ka sika lukos no nalabasan no wa din alapa ka tol-ob.
kuò
na-an
Nò, ka sikan no kagi, waro nigligkat to kandin no goinawa. Di su kandin ka Labow to mgo Talagpanubad to sikan no tuid, impasolod to Magboboot ka sikan no kagi to goinawa rin no ka litukan ian to ogpakimatoy si Hisus to mgo Hudiu.
Natumpì on ka manggad
hangos
Nò, nigpaagad–agad to mgo sundalu ka innangon to igbuyag dan. No ko marusilom on, inhatod dan on si Pablo dio to lunsud to Antipatria.
“Pamminog kow! Songo allow, duon sagboka no otow no nighipanow dio to kamot din oyow og-orok.
lipas
Nò, duon mgo talagbantoy to karniru dio to nakamotan no nigmarani to lunsud to Bitlihim no ogbabantoy to mgo ayam dan no karniru ko marusilom.
dakol no ukù
Duon dod kagi ni Huan. Kagi rin, “Sikandin no ogpuun dio to langit, labow sikandin to tibo. Di atag sikandin no ogligkat to soin no kalibutan, soin no kalibutan ka ugpaan din woy tongod to soin no kalibutan sikan ian ka ogkagion din. Di sikandin no nigligkat dio to langit, kandin ka niglabow to tibo.
Ian to oglitos to ogkakoon dod su duon kinagian to Magboboot no impasulat din dongan. Kagi, “Ka kalibutan woy ka tibo no duon to kalibutan, ian tagtuun ka Magboboot.” Ian ka kagi rin.
Ka alag, maporos ko ogsopo-on ta
Ka ngaran to tatolu no mgo boi, ian si Maria Magdalina, si Maria no inoy ni Santiago woy ni Husi woy ka inoy to mgo anak ni Sibidiu.
ogma-awang to goinawa
Ko ogpaninga ki og-awò to maligsom diò to ngipon
Nigkagian ni Hisus ka mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu. Kagi rin, “Nigbogoy ni Moisis kaniu ka Balaod no impasulat to Magboboot kandin dongan. Di sikaniu, waro agad sagboka kaniu no ogtuman to soini no Balaod. Manio naan to duon bantaan now to oghimatoy koddi?”
dugong
Ko nakarinog on to nokouma si Hisus duon to Galilia no ogligkat to Hudia, nigtagbu dio ka sikan no lukos ki Hisus. Pighinggat din si Hisus to ogduma kandin dio to Kapirnaum oyow ogbawian din pad ka anak din no ogdaralu no kai naan do to liog din ka goinawa rin.
Nigbunggù to boi ka ulu to alu-an no namatoy on.
Ka mgo batò koy pad, ogpaligli-agoy koy dongan no ogkagian noy to, “Oghimu ki to ambow-ambow no ogtigbason noy to bolad noy ka bakalawan to duma noy.”
dutdut
Na-antog ka goinawa rin to bayungbayung dò kandin. Natokow ki su warò ki no-inso-i.
No si Huan, nigtulin on ka lawa rin no nigmasalig ka goinawa rin to Magboboot. Taman to allow no nigtangko din to ognangon to mgo Hudiu no ian mgo pinanganak ni Israil tongod to nangnangonon to Magboboot, dio mog-ugpo sikandin to holholawan.
Pulus nu
Ko du-on magaliug ta, ogdagap ka songo baloy ka ogtagbu to ogtagataga.
indanan
tambabò
lingut
Sikan ian no ogsuguon ku sikoykow to oyow ungod nu ro ogpoomotan to ogpannangonnangon to kinagian to Magboboot agad ko ogkoiniatan to mgo otow to ogpamminog woy ko kono dan ogkoiniatan. Tul-ira nu ka mgo otow no makasasalo. Sapari nu ka kono ogpaagad-agad to Magboboot. Udlingi nu sikandan to maroyow. Woy malaya ta nu to goinawa ka mgo otow no og-anaron nu
Di ka maroot no mgo otow woy ka oggawoy to duma no mgo otow, ogkatimulan do duon ka maroot no oghimuon dan no oggawayan dan ka duma no mgo otow to pogtuu ran woy songo ogkagawayan sikandan.
Ko ogbanganan, og-atangan ka ogbaya-an to mangayow.
Kagi ni Maria, “Maroyow ku man ko ogkatuman ka tibo no innangon nu koddi su suguonon a to Magboboot.” Nò, nig-awo on ka diwata no pigsugu to Magboboot dio ki Maria.
Kagi rod ni Maria, “Nigpakita rin ka kandin no kohoy-u to tibo no duon tahud kandin woy ligkat to dangob no kapunganan dio to mgo sunud no kapunganan.
solug
pamulingan
Nighimu rin ka tibo no ogkohimu rin. Pigbus-ugan din ka lana kai to lawa ku oyow igpanagana rin ka lawa ku to allow no igsabalan ka lawa ku.
Nigtabak si Hisus no nigkagi to, “Sulod, ka mgo laku duon ogkougpaan dan woy ka mgo manukmanuk duon salag dan. Di koddi atag no Kakoy to Koot-otawan, waro baloy ku no ogkohibatan ku.”
ulug
anup
Kò nu bindasa ka kinabò ku su ogkagisì.
ondang
Ka ugis no antabun, warò solug no batok su tibulus no mapotì.
tuad
No sikaniu, abin kow ni Kristu, no si Kristu, abin dod to Magboboot.
sinug-ung
agud
lawod
Duon dio to kaniu nokani ka nighimu pad to sikan no maroot no batasan. Di, nig-awo on ni Hisus ka mgo salo now no nigbogayan kow on to Magboboot. Woy nohimu kow on no maroyow dio to tangkaan din su ligkat to ngaran ni Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy ligkat dod to Gimukud to Magboboot no ian Magboboot tanow.
unug
Pogkaponga to pog-inum dan, nigkanta sikandan to sagboka no kanta no igsayo dan dio to Magboboot. Pogkaponga dan to nigkanta, niglibuwas sikandan woy nighondio sikandan to bubungan no oghingaranan to Olibu.
awos
Nò, nighondio si Ananias to kanak woy nigsasindog to longod ku. Kagi rin to, ‘Sulod Saulo, gimulat kad on.’ Sikan do ian no nakakita ad on, woy nigkita a ki Ananias.
katagbungan
No kuntoon,” kagi ni Pedro, “Soini ka ignangon ku kaniu to, kono now ol–ologi ka Magboboot kaniu to ogpogoson now poron ka kono no Hudiu to oyow ogpakapaagad–agad to Balaod ni Moisis su ogkohirapan poron. Di agad sikanta no mgo Hudiu lagkos to mgo kaap–apuan ta, songo waro ta maaguanta no ogtuman to sikan no Balaod.”
Ko niglogsad on ka ariplano no nigbulig ka mgo otow to ogpandulung to oghinatod ka mgo kalaglagan now diò to baloy, du-on dò ogkataman to baloy ka ighatod ka kalaglagan. Igparagas on no iglapow diò to ampow.
Sikan ian to tibo no pog-ampu ku to Magboboot, iglagkos ku sikaniu to pog-ampu ku. Ka Magboboot ka ogpakamalogot to soini no ignangon ku to sikandin ka ogpaag-agaran ku to pogpoomot ku to ognangonnangon a to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus.
taligtig
Waro malugoy no ogmohon–ing on ka ogtuu on ki Hisus, duon mgo nigtuu no Ginirigu ka kinagian dan, di ka duma, Hinibriu atag ka kinagian dan. No ka mgo Girigu, ogsilag on to mgo Hibriu. Ian su allow–allow no ogkatalaran ka mgo boi no nabalu to koonon, dakoldakol ka ingkabogoy dio to mgo balu no Hibriu. Di mamalintok ka ingkatalad dio to mgo balu no Girigu.
libod
Waro malugoy no duon darua no sakup din no nighipanow dio to dalan no oghondio to hilit. Poglibuwas ni Hisus kandan, loin ka langlangawan din no wa dan tokora.
“Di kono kow ogkahallok to sikan no mgo otow su ka hinimuan dan no inholos dan ogkatagaan dod uromo, su agad nokoy no kono dan ignangon kuntoon, ogkatagaan dod uromo.
Warò igkapasamboy noy su songo pogko-on na-an dò.
Ogkoiniatan noy to oyow ka Magboboot no Amoy tanow woy ka Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow no si Hisu Kristu, ogbogoy kaniu to maawang no goinawa now woy ka dakol no pogkohoy-u ran.
sagupit
ngilam
Ka mgo otow, no-otow no du-on mgo mata.
Ian su ligkat to sikan no maroyow no oghimuon now, ogkabuligan ka mgo nigtuu to og-awoson dan. Di kono no sikan do di ogpasalamatan ka Magboboot to mohon-ing no mgo otow.
ulingol
ponong
u-us
Ko ogkatigbas on no ogkotul on ka laplap, no ian on ka ambow no namanoik to bolad din. Sikan ka og-ambow-ambow.
Sikan ian ka nakakagi ni Pedro su nahallok lagboy si Pedro mgo duma rin no kono ogpakakagi to loin.
Agad mo-umaan ki to makamumua, warad bali su aguantoon tad.
Nò, ogdoromdomon ta si Abraham no kaap-apuan ta su ligkat to nighimu rin, nohimu on sikandin no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot. Ian su nigpaagad-agad si Abraham to kagi to Magboboot no nighimatayan din on poron ka anak din dio to tubaranan oyow igbogoy rin on to Magboboot.
Nigparagas ka diwata no suguanon to Magboboot to kagi rin ki Sakarias to, “Ogpuun to kagi ni Huan, mohon-ing ka mgo otow no pinanganak ni Israil no ogpakalibong ka goinawa ran dio to Lagboy no Igbuyag dan no Magboboot.
Nig-alap dan on. Pogkita to busow ki Hisus nig-umaan din ka bato no impabiidbiid din sikandin no napolod ka bato dio to tano no ogkabalbalikid woy ogbubuko so bo-bo din.
Di woy si Pablo, nanhipanow on ligkat to Pirga no nokouma on to loin no lunsud to Antiokia duon to probinsia to Pisidia. No to Allow ran to Oghimoloy, nanhondio to songo baloy no anaranan to mgo Hudiu no nigpinpinnuu sikandan.
Pogkarinog ku to sikan no kagi, niglingi a oyow ogpitawon ku ko hontow ka nigkagi kanak. No duon nigkita ku no papitu no bulawan no sabukanan to mgo ilawan.
pungos
Warò makasugat sikan no kagi.
Uromo, igpanabod kow to mgo amoy now, mgo inoy now, mgo hari woy ko kakoy now, mgo sulod now woy ko mgo duma now no kono ogtuu no ighatod kow dio to mgo talagboboot. Duon duma kaniu no ogtuu koddi no oghimatayan dan.
Nigtinagpa-an on to miow to nigdawi ka amagal to songo nigdawi to bakokang.
Hontow no baloy?
takù
Bahin to nokoy ka matuwarong ogpatokoron din to nigmatarong ad su oghondio a to Amoy ku no kona ad on ogkitoon nikaniu.
botuv
Ligkat dod to pogtuu ni Rahab no sagboka no boi no maroot ka batasan din, napangabangan on no waro makalagkos to nammatoy on ka mgo otow no waro nigpaagad-agad to Magboboot no dio to Hiriku. Ian su maroyow ka pogsagman din to mgo pinanganak ni Israil no mgo talagbangan.
Ka sikan no nig-ulì a ligkat to Davao no nig-obu-an ka ulu ku, nigpamula koy to homoy.
Insulip on ka lata.
butung
“Di su waro man nigduma sikandan, maroyow ko soini no mgo Hudiu kai kuntoon no ogbayungbayung kanak, ignangon dan koykow ko duon pigkita ran no salo ku no nig–in–insaan a ran no dio koy pad to Hirusalim no nigsasindog a to tangkaan to mgo pogbuyagon noy.
tiklobù
sabloy
sawò
Sikan ian, ogmoos-osonoy kow woy ogmabubuligoy kow oyow ogdakolon ka pogtuu now tibo unawa to kuntoon no batasan now.
nanam
hasò
Mgo sulod, duon soini no igkarago noy su ogpakamalogot ka goinawa noy to matuwarong ka mgo batasan noy dio to agad hontow di lagboy dio to kaniu. Ian su nigbulig ka Magboboot kanami oyow tolok no maroyow ka tuud noy woy matuwarong ka tibo no oghimuon noy. No ka sikan, waro nigligkat to katouanan to mgo otow to soini no kalibutan di nigligkat atag to pogkohoy-u to Magboboot kanami.
Maroyow ko tibo kinow no ogmasalig on to pogtuu ta ki Hisu Kristu, ogsagbokoon do ka pogdoromdom tanow to soini no innangon ku kaniu. Di ko duon dio to kaniu no kono ogkounawa ka pogdoromdom dan to soini no innangon ku, ka Magboboot on ka ogbalagad no ogpasabut kandan.
kayagkag
kupas
Ko mahapun on to alas tris, ogdukimot be on ka allow no ogmakopal on woy ogmo-itom on ka kibol.
Nò, ogtokoron ta to og-uyun a to maroyow man ka Balaod to Magboboot su kono ku ogkoiniatan ka oghimuon ku no ogpakalop-ang to sikan no Balaod din.
buo
Sikan no otow no ogkootawan no waro katamanan, ogkataga to koykow ka malogot no Magboboot. Woy ogkataga sikandan to sikoddi ka nigpohondini nud to kai to soin no kalibutan.
gunù
Sikan do ian no ka mgo sundalu no ogbaras poron no og–insoinso ki Pablo, nan–awo duon to longod din. Woy songo nahallok on ka igbuyag to mgo sundalu su nataga sikandin to nasakup si Pablo to gobirnu to Ruma woy su nakasalo on to balaod to sikan no gobirnu su nigpabanggutan din si Pablo.
Inogo on to nigmarusilom on, ka mgo nigtuu no taga Tisalunika, impohipanow ran on si Pablo daruwa ki Silas no oghondio to lunsud to Biria. Pogkouma ran dio to Biria, nigsolod on to anaranan to mgo Hudiu.
Ko ogboli ki, og-ayad-ayaron ta to ogpitow.
Nataga kow, ka waro kow pad nigtokod to Magboboot, duon pad nigpounug kaniu to og-ampu to mgo inotow-otow no kono ogpakatabak. Woy nakapaagad-agad kow pad to sikan no nig-unugan now.
Tibo Dominggu, tag sagboka kaniu, panagana kow to igbogoy now ko songo monu ka koykow no noumaan. No limura now woy isabuksabuk now pad oyow, ko ogdatong a, konad og-awoson to ogpan-am-amutoy kow pad.
tagimtim
Nò, duon nigdinog ku no maagbot no lagong no nigligkat dio to Dakol no Ampuanan. No nigkagian din ka papitu no mgo diwata to Magboboot, no kagi rin to, “Hondio kow on woy ibus-ug now dio to kalibutan ka tagu to sikan no papitu no boung no ian ka igkabolu to Magboboot.”
Nigpo-uran to kallayag so-i uran.
haud
No kono no sikan do no pogdatong din ka nakabulig to kanami no goinawa. Di ko innangonnangon din on ka imbulig now to kandin no goinawa, sikan ka dangob no ingkabulig to kanami no goinawa. Ian su nignangonan koy rin to dakol ka igkoiniat now to ogkita kanak woy to lagboy no nokogsondit ka goinawa now to mgo nohimu dio to kaniu no kono no litos. Woy nignangon kanak to magaan kow ogtuman ko nokoy ka ignangon ku kaniu. Sikan ian to nigdakol on ka igkarago ku.
Ian din do pigpangabangan woy si Lot su maroyow ka batasan din su dakol ka ingkaaras to goinawa rin to maroot no mgo batasan to mgo otow dio to lunsud to Suduma no kono ogpaagad-agad to balaod.
Ka lalima kandan, malopot do ka pogdoromdom dan. Ka dangob no lalima duon malayat woy maroyow no pogdoromdom dan.
Nò, unawa rod ko igpangulibot to otow ka Dakol no Ampuanan to Magboboot, ka Dakol no ampuanan woy ka Magboboot no dio og-ugpo to Langit ka igpangulibot din.
Ko kono, nokoy pad,” kagi ni Hisus, “ka inhondio now? Ka otow no ogpokoilis to maroyow lagboy no kinabo dan? Ka mgo otow no og-ilis to mahal no kinabo woy madmaroyow ka pog-ugpo dan, dio atag og-ugpo to mgo baloy to mgo datu,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ka dii to baloy no ambow, konò ogtatabunan su diò baloy oghimu to salag dan.
“Ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy ka mgo Parisiu, sikandan do ka talaglituk to Balaod no ingalat ni Moisis.
tilaa
Nò, himata kow on woy hogoti now on ka nasamo to pogtuu now su nabatukan ku ka mgo batasan now to naalang-alang to tangkaan to Magboboot.
Ko nokouma on, nigpoinum dan porom ki Hisus ka bino no in-amut dan ka tambal no oghingaranan to mira di wa din inuma.
Ko ogpakalongod on kanta ka sawog, ogkabantang ta.
Nohimu tibo sikan ki Maria woy ki Husi oyow ogkatuman ka innangon dongan to Magboboot pinabayo to talagnangon din no nigkagi rin to,
Ka udling, sagboka no ig-anad woy igsapad to mgo maro-ot no mgo batasan.
bibitan
gotok
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin to, “Ka inholos dongan bahin to Pogsugu to Magboboot, igpasabut din kaniu no mgo hibatoon ku, di to duma no mgo otow igholos din pad kandan.
sugù
Pogdoromdom ni Pedro to sikan, nigparagas on nighipanow no oghondio to baloy ni Maria no inoy ni Huan no nighingaranan ki Markos. Mohon–ing ka mgo otow no nalimud no nig–ampu to Magboboot.
ag-ag
Ka hibatoon ni Hisus no si Huan darua ki Santiago, pogkataga ran to kono ogpasagpiton dio to taga Samaria si Hisus, nig-inso dan kandin to, “Buyag, litos buwa ko ogbuyu koy porom to ogpo-uranan to hapuy no ogpuun dio to langit oyow ogkasilaban on ka sikan no mgo otow?”
Waro labot nu ka soini no oghimuon noy su kono no maroyow ka goinawa nu to tangkaan to Magboboot.
Ka mgo otow no ogligad nigsaparan dan ka mgo nabutud woy nigsugu to, ‘Hagtong kow pa og-umow.’ Di nigpaagbotan dan nasi ka pogbabansagon dan no kagi ran, “Pinanganak ni Dabid, kohoy-ui koy bag.”
ogtubù
To diad to dalan, nignangon si Hisus kandan to, “Og-ongkoran a now su duon impasulat to Magboboot dongan. Kagi, ‘Oghimatayan ku ka Talagbantoy to karniru woy ogpakagsuwoysuwoy on ka mgo karniru.’
Di intagu dan to ulu ran, konon dio to pusung dan woy kono do no kalugoy no magaan dan ongkori ka pogtuu ran to Magboboot ko ogkoumaan sikandan to igkabaybayari ran woy ko ogsumpaliton sikandan su nigtuu to Magboboot.
No si Husi, songo nighondio on ligkat to lunsud to Nasarit no duon to Probinsia to Galilia, no dio mogdolog to lunsud to Bitlihim no dio ian to Probinsia to Hudia. No ian to nighipanow si Husi dio to Bitlihim su dio ian mootow ka dongan no Labow no Igbuyag dan no si Dabid, no pinanganak ni Dabid si Husi.
banggal
No kagi to diwata kanak to, ‘Wow Pablo, kono ka ogkahallok su ogpokouma ka rod no ogpakasasindog ka to tangkaan ni Igbuyag Sisar. Woy ignangonan ku koykow to songo ogkohoy–uan to Magboboot ka tibo no mgo duma nu kai to barku oyow tibo kono ogkamatoy su duon goinawa to Magboboot koykow.’
damaan
Sikan ian, agad hondoi noy ogpanlogoblogobon ka mgo otow no nigtuu to Magboboot, ogkasayo noy sikaniu su og-aguantoon now ka igkabaybayari now. Woy sayoon noy sikaniu su, agad nokoy ka ogkabayaan now no igkasasow now woy ko igkabaybayari, ogparagason now ka pogtuu now.
Pogkagi pad ni Pedro, nakataliwaro on sikandan to malayag no gapun. Puun to sika no gapun nakarinog sikandan to kagi to Magboboot. Kagi rin, “Soini ka anak ku no indakoli ku lagboy ka goinawa ku kandin; narago a lagboy kandin. Pamminog kow kandin.”
Di kona a ogpatahud to mgo otow ka koddi no ngaran. Di duon ogtahud koddi no sikandin ka ogboboot to pogsayo koddi.”
witwit
No ka papitu no diwata to Magboboot, nigpanagana on to oghiup to sikan no bungag no nan-alap dan.
Woy songo waro mannuguni to Magboboot ka mgo otow dongan no nan-ugpo kai to ampow to soini no tano no waro mogtahud kandin. Ian su nigpougub din ka tibo no mgo woig no nalonod on tibo sikandan. Di nigpangabangan din atag si Noi no nignangonnangon to mgo otow ko nokoy ka batasan no igmaroyow to Magboboot. Woy duon papitu no duma ni Noi no songo napangabangan.
taglas
Tongod ko du-on amigu ta no maroyow to pogdumaruma ta di ko du-on kanta rin to Magbobo-ot di warad sikandin kai to tanò, ogka-alimotow ka ko ogpakarinog ka to sikan no kanta ko manokal pad kandin.
Woy kagi rin kanak to, “Napongaan on ka tibo. Sikanak ka an-anayan woy ka mohurian. Woy sikanak dod ka kabinunsuran woy ka katamanan to tibo. Ko duon agad hontow no ogkammaraan, ogpoinumon ku sikandin to woig no waro bayad no ogligkat to sobsob no ogpakabogoy to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
danlak
Tu-tuu ian to ogkounawa ka dilo ta to hapuy no ogpakaraat to pog-ugpo ta su, to soini no igsumpul to lawa ta, ka dilo ta ian ka igbokal to maroot kai to tibo no lawa ta, mgo goinawa ta. Ko bato ki pad taman to ogkamatoy ki, ian dakol no igkaaras ta ka soini no dilo ta. No ogkounawa to songo hapuy no ogparokotan ni Satanas.
ili
Duon duma no mgo otow no dio to Hirusalim og-ugpo no kagi ran, “Soini buwa ian ka otow no oghimatayan porom to mgo igbuyag ta.
likal
dampolak
Ko nalugoy on no ungod kandin ogpanakow, natagaan on to mgo otow no malogot to kandin ka nigpurut.
No si Birnabi woy ki Saulo, napongaan dan on ka inhondio dan to Hirusalim, no niglibong on to lunsud to Antiokia. Woy pigduma ran on si Huan no og–anggaan ki Markos.
Bantoy kow! Tanudtanud kow woy ampu kow su sikaniu pa, waro kow mataga ko kon-u a oglibong.
doyow
Pogpitow ku, duon papitu no mgo diwata to Magboboot. Sikandan ka ogsasindog dio to tangkaan to Magboboot. No nigbogayan sikandan to papitu no bungag.
pangoylon
Si Jeany no anak ku no no-ulug to santol, ogpakangangang no subla ka al-al no masakit lagboy.
hanupul
Songo allow no ogsimboon dan ka Lagboy no Igbuyag woy niglangkad to pogkoon dan, no kagi to Gimukud to Magboboot kandan to, “Ibogoy now on si Birnabi daruwa ki Saulo oyow ogpakatuman to igpohimu ku kandan.”
Nò. Duon buwa otow no nahan din no oglitos buwa no ogparagason ta ka mgo salo ta su nokoy naan kun to ian ogpakamaroyow kanta dio to tangkaan to Magboboot ka pogkohoy-u rin kanta no kono ogligkat to pogtuman ta to Balaod din. Kono man no litos ka sikan no doromdom,
Ogpoobos ki woy ogponoron ta ka goinawa ta. Nò, waro balaod no ogpakasapad to sikan no innangon ku.
Ka otow no ogtuu woy duon pogsabut din, ogtimulan pad to Magboboot ka pogsabut din oyow ogdakol ka ogkatagaan din. Di ka otow no kono ogtuu, og-awoon pad to Magboboot ka doisok no duon to ulu rin.
Natibbian ka mata.
tong-ow
antiklap
Agad ogka-alam nu di ko subla ka buyù, konò ka ogpakapurut.
habas
Sikan ian no niglibong koy on poron kaniu dio to Tisalunika. Sikanak no si Pablo, malasi a ian poron oglibong kaniu di nig-atangan koy ni Satanas.
luras
bot
Ian igsabi to asawa to hari rin to iras.
Ogbautismu a kaniu to woig di sikandin ogbautismu kaniu pinabayo to Gimukud to Magboboot.”
No pogdani to bato ki Hisus, impaagbot usunga to busow ka bato dio to tano woy ogkomoron on ka lawa to bato. Di pigsaparan ni Hisus ka busow oyow oglibuwas on dio to lawa to bato, nabawian on ka bato. Pogkaponga duon, in-uli on ni Hisus ka bato dio to amoy rin.
sulang
Ko duon duma now no ogtuu ki Hisus di waro pad makasabut to tibo tongod to pogtuu ran, bogayi now to og-amut kaniu, di kono kow ogpaap-apuloy kandan tongod ko nokoy ka nahan dan no og-awoson to ogtumanon dan to pogtuu ran.
Ogbogayan ta to pogtahud ka tibo no mgo otow. Woy igdakdakoli ta to goinawa ka tibo no sulod ta to pogtuu. Ogtahuron ta ka Magboboot woy songo ogtahuron ta ka labow no igbuyag to tibo no mgo ugpaan.
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, agad nokoy ka pog-ugpo ta no nig-abin kid on ni Hisus, kono kid ian oghalin, su ka Magboboot ka ogtanudtanud kanta.
Di duon dod igpasabut kaniu no mgo patalaalunggun. Ian su og-awoson to tag sagboka no lukos, igdakoli rin to goinawa ka asawa rin no og-unawoon ka igdakoli rin to kandin no unoy no lawa. No ka mgo boi no duon on asawa, og-awoson din to ogtahuron din ka asawa rin.
Oghingaranan a now to Maistru woy Buyag. Litos man ian su maistru a now woy Igbuyag a now.
“Amo,” kagi rin, “Amoy ku! Agad nokoy, ogpokohimu ka to tibo. Awaa nu ka igkabaybayari no ogpokouma kai to koddi. Di kono no sikoddi ka ogboboot; ka koykow ian no pogboot ka ogkatuman.”
Nò mgo sulod, duon igpananglitan ku kaniu. Ko duon igsabut to songo otow woy ko nigpirmaan dio to tangkaan to mgo talagmalogot, waro ogpakabalabag woy songo waro ogpakatimul to sikan no insabut din.
Tag sagboka kandan, duon man hon-om no mgo pakpak dan no nigtangkapan to mgo mata dio to ampow woy ka dio to saluluan. No to maallow woy marusilom, kono oghagtonghagtong sikandan to pog-opad. Soini ka og-opparon dan, “Ka Magboboot, Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy Mamabogbog to tibo. Tibulus no maroyow sikandin. Waro salo din woy waro agad nokoy no maroot dio to goinawa rin. Ogkohimu rin ka tibo. Duon on sikandin tahan ligkat dongan, woy kuntoon, woy taman to waro katamanan.”
Nohimu soini oyow ogkatuman ka kagi to Magboboot dio to Tahan no Kasulatan. Kagi, “Waro pantigi ka bokog din; agad sagboka, waro.”
torung
tugul
No nigpurut ni Hisus ka songo basu no nataguan to bino no moomis pad no nigpasalamatan din pad ka Magboboot. Pogkaponga, intaruwoy rin ka basu dio to mgo hibatoon din no kagi rin to, “Puruta now ka soini no basu woy sasamsamaa now to og-inum ka tagu din.
Waro dan simbaa ka tu-tuu ian woy mabogbog no Magboboot no waro katamanan, di ian dan pigsimba ka mgo hinimuan dan no mgo inotow-otow no ogkoiling to mgo ayam woy to mgo manukmanuk woy ka mgo ulod.
Sikan ian no niglogparan on to diwata to Magboboot si Hirodis su waro din sayaa ka tu–tuu ian no Magboboot. No nig–iasan on ka lawa ni Hirodis woy namatoy on.
Du-on otow no ogpaginbangalug no ogbayò no ogtakorog on ko oghondiò to bubungan.
dongkig
Di tu-tuu ian to nouyag on man si Hisu Kristu ligkat to kamatayon din. Sikandin ka nohun-a mootawi no igpatuu to songo ogkouyag dod ka mgo nammatoy no nigtuu ki Hisus.
himu
ubal
No, ka hibatoon no nigdakoli ni Hisus to goinawa rin, nigkagian din si Pedro no kagi rin, “Ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta ian.” To pogdinog ni Pedro to Lagboy no Igbuyag naan sikan, piglogdak din ka akob to kinabo din su niglobas man sikandin. Nò, nigtinugpu on dio to woig.
Sunud, ka igkatatolu no hari, songo nig-asawa rin man do ka nabalu. No, unawa ro ian ka sunud no mgo patalahari no lukos taman to noubus kun on ka papitu no natibo namatoy to waro pad ian anak dan.
pugtuk
Ko du-on kogang, ogluiton ka tabakù no igpakopkop to palì no ig-atang to langow.
Ogdalong ki to og-u-uranda. Og-osonon ta to, "Ungod ka og-u-uranda." Ka sikan, ogdalong ki to igkaragò ta.
Nò, nig-onow si Husi woy nigduma rin on ka bato woy ka inoy rin no nanhipanow on sikandan to sikan no karusiloman pohondio to Ehipto.
Nò, og-ongkoran tad on ka tibo no maroot no goinawa ta to duma ta. Kono ki oglalangot. Kono ki ogkabolu to mgo duma ta, woy kono kid ogbabansagon kandan. Kono tad ogdooton ka agad hontow. Woy og-awoon tad ka tibo no mgo maroot to pogpitow ta to duma ta.
gulabung
lungga
masakit ka goinawa
alig
diò
hamatuk
Ko og-ampu kow, kono now unugi ka mgo otow no ogpatuutuu ka pogtuu ran. Ogkoiniat sikandan to ogsasindog no og-ampu dio to mgo anaranan to mgo og-ampu woy dio to babalakan to mgo kalasara oyow ogkitoon sikandan to mgo otow no ogsayoon sikandan. To duon on ka pogsayo to mgo otow, sikan do ian ka igsayo kandan.
hogot
Di pogkataga ni Husi to ka labow no igbuyag to Hudia, ian si Arkilaus ka nakasoip to amoy rin no si Hirodis, nanahallok sikandin. Tongod to dangob pad no inpatagoinop ki Husi to Magboboot, nig-udlingan sikandin. Omunaan nigparagas sikandan dio to probinsia to Galilia.
balabag
No ka tibo kaniu no nigbautismuan to pogkasagboka now ki Kristu, ogpokounug kow on lagboy to goinawa rin.
Ka amoy ni Naasom, si Aminadab. Ka amoy ni Aminadab, si Admin. Ka amoy ni Admin, si Arni. Ka amoy ni Arni, si Hisron. Ka amoy ni Hisron, si Piris. Ka amoy ni Piris, si Huda.
Ko oglukuban, ogkolkolon on su nigsoloran on ka bantoy rin.
lupug
langkotow
Ka otow no ognangonnangon no konò ogngisi, ogbaghot ka ogkagi ko nokoy ka balità din.
Duon dod insugu ni Hisus kandan. Kagi rin, “Ogmanhipanow kow dio to tibo no mgo ugpaanan kai to soin no kalibutan woy pannangoni now ka tibo no mgo koot-otawan to Maroyow no Nangnangonon.
Ogbuyu a to Amoy ku oyow ogbogayan kow to duma no Talagbulig no ogdurumaruma kaniu taman to waro katamanan.
lingkit
Po-po-an nu oyow ogkamolù; ungod ogsopo-on oyow ogka-abolong nu.
No to pila pad buwa no allow woy ni Agripa dio ki Gobirnador Pistu, no innangonnangon din on ki Agripa tongod ki Pablo. Kagi ni Pistu to, “Duon otow, no si Pablo, no napirisu no inggalat ni Gobirnador Pilik no naliwanan on sikandin to katondanan.
Agad to nigbolog ta to konò oghondiò to kamot din ko og-angoy to ogkako-on dan su mabogbog lagboy no bolog, nasì on man nighondiò no nigsagad on to mangayow. Nigpupusil.
Nig-agpas dan on dakopa ka anak din no nighimatayan dan sikandin no indogpak dan ka lawa rin dio to libuwasan to pinamula to ubas.”
sikò
sawod
kabuon
Nakarinog ka mgo igbuyag to Parisiu to mgo otow no ognaasnaas do to mgo duma ran bahin ki Hisus. Nò, ka sikan no mgo Parisiu woy ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad ka nigsugu to mgo sundalu no talagbantoy to ampuanan dan oyow ogdakopon dan on si Hisus.
Di waro makaroog to kagi rin su pigbogayan si Istiban to katouanan woy to kabogbogan no nigligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot.
salig
Nahan now buwa no sikaniu ka litos no ogtul-id to batasan to otow no waro pad amana mataga to Magboboot. Woy songo nahan now buwa ko sikaniu rod ka ogpakaanad to mgo otow no iam pad og-anad tongod to Magboboot. Ian ka doromdom now su ogsalig kow to nabogayan kow to Balaod no impasulat dongan to Magboboot, woy su ogsalig kow rod to matul-id ian lagboy woy tu-tuu ian ka katagaanan now no ogligkat to sikan no Balaod.
Masabit si Buntit.
tubung
Nò, su nig-aguanta ni Abraham to ogtagad to pogtuman to Magboboot to kagi rin, pogkalugoy, nakapurut si Abraham to sikan no insabut to Magboboot kandin.
Ko ogkolkol, ogbunsud no ogkolkolonon.
Ogkohonat ka pa-a ta ka ogtakang ki woy ogdi-ok ki.
kotok
Tongod to soini, nanundul ki Hisus ka mohon-ing lagboy no mgo otow. Duon mgo otow no nigpuun dio to probinsia to Galilia, ka mgo duma, ligkat dio to lunsud no Dikapolis woy dio to dakol no lunsud to Hirusalim, woy dio to probinsia to Hudia, woy ka mgo duma, dio to doipag to woig to Hordan nigligkat.
Kono now kalingawi mgo sulod ko hontow kow no otawa nokani no pig-abin kow to Magboboot, su to pogdoromdom to mgo otow kai to tano, manalingboka kow no duon natouan woy manalingboka kow no duon nakaalap to dakol no katondanan woy songo manalingboka kow no duon dakol no ngaran.
gapon
sagpì
timbang
Agad ka Magboboot no Amoy ku no nigsugu koddi dini, nigtitigus on koddi. Di waro kow nigdinog to lagong din woy waro kow nigkita to Magboboot.
Sikan ian ka ogtokoron ta ko hontow ka mgo anak to Magboboot woy ko hontow ka abin ni Satanas, su ka otow no kono oghimu to maroyow woy ka otow no waro goinawa rin to duma rin, kono no anak to Magboboot.
Ko ogtotomog ka to hapuy no oghiupan nu, ogko-obolan ka mata nu no ogmaporos on.
sakomit
layud
woy songo nigkita rin ka songo publi lagboy no boi no nabalu no daddarua bag no malintok no salapi ka insabuk din dio to sabukanan to salapi.
Ko og-uma ka dalu no tiklas diò to songo ugpa-an, ko du-on ogpanumbaloy no ogligkat to sikan no ugpa-an, ogka-alapan ki to dalu.
Woy nigpabautismu on si Lidia lagkos to mgo otow dio to baloy rin. Pogkaponga, duon kagi ni Lidia no ogbuyu to ogpougpoon koy to baloy rin. Kagi rin to, “Ko waro pogduwaruwa now to pogtuu ku to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus, pamaniok kow on woy ugpo kow pad kai to baloy ku.” Sikan ian no namanoik koy on ian no dio koy pad nig–ugpo su noim–imuan koy ian ni Lidia.
Nò, tibo no mgo otow dut lunsud, nighondio no ogtagbu ki Hisus. Pogpokouma ran dio ki Hisus, ogbuyuon dan ki Hisus to og-ongkoran din ka kandan no tano.
Songo ogkounawa rod, duon otow no ogsumansuman to duon allow no oglabow to dangob no allow. Woy duon pad otow no ogdoromdom ko ogkoun-unawa ro ka agad hondoi no allow. Di tag sagboka no otow, og-awoson to waro igkaruwaruwa dio to kandin no goinawa ko ka oghimuon din, oglitos on ian to tangkaan to Magboboot.
kusaput
Ian su ko duon otow no ogkamatoy on, konad on ogkabootan to goinawa rin no ogkoiniat poron to salo.
Sikanami, mgo sulod, waro igholos noy. Kono koy og-iling ki Moisis no nig-atangan din ka langlanguwan din to manggad no manipis su oyow ka mgo pinanganak ni Israil, kono ogpakakita ko ogkaawo ka sikan no layag.
No ka mgo boi no nigtuu, ogkoiniatan ku to oglitoslitos ka pog-ilis dan to lawa ran oyow waro igkasipod ta ko nokoy ka ilisan dan. Og-awoson to kono dan ogpasublaan ka igmaroyow to bulbul dan woy ko sabinit dan unawa ko oghimasaran dan ka bulbul dan to bulawan, woy ko mahal no baliog, woy og-awoson dan to kono dan ig-ilis ka lagboy no mahal no manggad.
Nig-awoy a to oghibat.
Nò, duon darua no lukos no ogtalabau dio to kamot to sikan no allow. Sagboka ka ogbatunon to Magboboot woy sagboka ka ogkagalat.
Ian su ko duon otow no nabat-awan on to Magboboot ka goinawa ran, woy nokool-olog sikandan to soini no pogkouyag ta no igbogoy to Magboboot, woy nabogayan on sikandan to Gimukud din, woy to karoyawan no ogligkat to kinagian to Magboboot. Woy songo nakakita sikandan to oghimuon to Magboboot no nigligkat to kabogbogan din no ogkoiling to sikan no oghimuon din uromo ko ogpokouma on ka mohuri no mgo allow. Di ko og-ongkoran on to sikan no otow ka pogtuu ran, konad on ogkohimu no ogkohutuk no ogsondit woy og-ongkod to maroot no batasan dan no oghalin man doka goinawa ran dio to Magboboot. Ian su ka oghimuon dan, ogkounawa to igpalansang dan man doka Anak to Magboboot dio to krus woy ogpasiporan dan si Hisus dio to tangkaan to mgo otow.
gulak
suloy
Amana to nigsingallow kow to subla no mo-init.
Ka soini no ignangonnangon ku, kono no igparayandayan to lawa ku. Agad ko ogligkat to songo otow no igpaalap kaniu woy ko ogligkat pa kaniu, kono og-awoson no igpatokod ka katondanan ku ko oghondio a to songo ugpaan.
Kagi ni Ananias kanak to, ‘Ka Magboboot, no ian Magboboot dod to mgo kaap–apuan ta, sikandin ka nig–alam koykow to oyow ogkatagaan nud on ka ogkoiniatan to Magboboot, woy ogpakakita ka ki Hisus no ian ka Matuwarong no Suguanon din, woy ogpakarinog kad on to kandin lagboy no lagong.
Oghimu a to pinayag to agoloy.
Di ka sikan no igsumpul no maroyow to ogpitow, kono amana og-awoson to og-ay-ayaran. Di ka Magboboot ka nigtapid no oghimu to lawa ta oyow ogkasagman ka sikan no mgo igsumpul no inat to malintok ka pulus.
Du-on otow no mananoy ogko-opuk ka ogsonob to woig no ogtogkad sikandin to maralom no linow.
linggon
nig-inso sikandan to mgo otow no nigkagi to, “Hondoi ianak ka bato no Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu uromo? Nigkita noy ka bituon dio to ogsilaan to allow no indanan to poglusot kandin. Ian noy inhondini oyow ogsimboon noy sikandin.”
Nò, tagood to sikan, nigmamasamuk on ka tibo no mgo otow no nalimud woy nigmaso–soipoy ka ogbabansagon. Di ogloinloin ka ogkagion dan su ka kohon–ingan to sikan no nalimud, waro mataga ko nokoy ka nakalimud dan.
Nò, nigduma rin si Simon dio ki Hisus. Pogkita ni Hisus kandin nigkagi to, “Sikoykow si Simon no anak ni Huan. Oghingaranan ka ki Sipas.” Ka ngaran si Sipas woy ka ngaran si Pedro un-unawa ka kalitukan to soin no darua no ngaran. “Batu” ka kalitukan.
tultul
Ko du-on nighimatoy to songo lunggunan, nagulò to mangayow no natibò namatoy.
Tu-tuu ian ka kagi rin. Sikan ian, baghota nu to pogsapad kandan to waro pog-ulung-ulung oyow ogkabogayan sikandan to litos no ogmatul-id on ka pogtuu ran,
Sikan ian, su ligkat do to pogkohoy-u rin kanta, nangabangan kinow on to mgo salo ta su nigtuu kinow on ki Hisus. No ka sikan no pogpangabang din kanta, waro nigligkat to kanta no mgo hinimuan su imbogoy ro duon to Magboboot.
No nigkagian ni Hisus sikandan to dangob no pananglitan. Kagi rin, “Ka tagtuun to baloy, ko nataga pa ko kon-u ogpokouma ka panakow, waro porom moghirogo sikandin su songo nigpanagana porom oyow kono ogpakasolod ka takawon dio to baloy rin.
Nigmarani si Hisus kandan no pigpurut din ka paan woy impanbogoy kandan. Songo impanbogoy rin ka sikan no ngalap.
Sikan no mgo otow,” kagi ni Hisus, “ko ogtinawoon dan ka mgo insugu ku woy ko ogtumanon dan, sikan ian ka mgo otow no duon goinawa ran koddi. Ka sikan no mgo otow no duon goinawa koddi, songo duon goinawa to Amoy ku kandan. Agad sikoddi, dakol ka goinawa ku kandan woy songo ogpatokod a kandan.”
Ko ogpitow ki to ispiu, ogkito-on ta ka alung ta.
tigdò
No ka tibo no mgo otow no taga Girasa, woy ka mgo otow no nigligkat to mgo hilit, nigkagian dan si Hisus to oyow og-ongkoran din ka kandan no tano. Ian ka kagi ran su natokow on ian to dakol no ingkahallok dan puun to koin-inuan no impapitow ni Hisus kandan. Dokad di, ka pigbusawan no naawaan to mgo busow, nigbuyu din ki Hisus to, “Ogduma ad poron koykow.”
Di ka dilo ta atag, waro otow no ogpakaponod to sikan su magaan ogpakakagi to maroot. Ian ogkounawaan ka oghilu no ogpakaraat to pog-ugpo ta.
lantok
Napokas kai’t ulu ku ka liang
sikanak
Na-akoban ka oghimuon ta porom no an-anayan no na-aloy ki diò to dangob no warò ta nato-ori.
Natobal ka lobong ni Tuyo-ong.
Nò, ko nigpurut on ni Hudas ka sikan no pisang no paan nigsasindog no nigparagas on nighipanow. Nò, marusilom on ian.
Ko oglanog ka Liboganon no woig, maga-an dò og-os-os.
Sagboka ro ka Magboboot no ian Amoy tanow. Sikandin ka ogboboot kanta tibo. Woy duon sikandin to solod to tibo no goinawa ta no nigtuu kandin. Woy sikandin dod ka ogbulig kanta to ogtumanon ta ka tibo no igpohimu rin.
dulung
Di ko ogloinon tad ka goinawa ta to songo otow, ogpakasalo kid on. No ogkabatukan kid to niglop-ang kid on to sikan no Balaod to Magboboot
Ka igbuyag to sikan no anaranan to mgo Hudiu no si Krispu, nigtuu on to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. Woy ka tibo no mgo otow no nig–ugpo dio to baloy rin, songo nigtuu on. Woy mohon–ing ka mgo taga Kurintu no nigpamminog ki Pablo, no songo nigtuu on woy nigpabautismu on.
tagan
Ogpakabubunat kid to ambow no songo lo-in.
Insabuk kud on su nahallok a koykow su inat igbuyag ka no waro kohoy-u nu su ogkuon nu ka kono no koykow woy oggaani ka to waro nu isawod.’
Di nasi no nigbaghotan ni Pablo woy ki Birnabi to ignangon dan to mgo Hudiu to, “Sikaniu porom ka oghunnaan ognangoni to kinagian to Magboboot. Di, su ogkoison now man, sikaniu ka nigboboot to kono no litos no ogpurut kow to soini no kouyagan no waro katamanan. Sikan ian to dio koy on ogpannangonnangon to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu.
Di waro pad huliri ni Husi si Maria taman to nig-anak sikandin. Poglusot on to bato, si Hisus ka inngaran ni Husi.
Ka otow no oglogsad to tanò, ko ogpakarongan to ogkutol ka limukon, konò ogto-od to ogpamano-ug to tanò ka otow.
Di ko ogkapawo on no ogpamaluwag woy duon kibol, songo ognangon kow to, ‘Og-uran kuntoon su malalab so langit woy duon mgo kibol.’ Ogtagno kow ko og-uran woy ko og-allow. Di kono kow ogpakasabut ko nokoy ka kalitukan to mgo hinimuan to Magboboot kuntoon.
Og-anup ki to duma ta no warò ogkako-on.
kayow
Nigbabansagon ka sikan no otow no nigbusawan to, “Nokoy ka tuud nu koddi, Hisus, Anak to Kinalabawan no Magboboot? Ogbuyu a koykow no kai ki to tangkaan to Magboboot to kona a nu logpari.”
gunting
“Kaniu no mgo amoy,” kagi ni Hisus, “ko pananglitan, ogbuyuan kow to anak now to isda, kono kow man ogbogoy to ulod no ogpokohilu to anak now,
Pananglitan, ko duon on asawa nu, kono nu ogdoromdomon to og-ongkoran nud on sikandin. No ko waro asawa nu, maroyow ko kono ka ogpamangho to og-asawoon nu.
Nò man, koddi ka sagboka no ogtitigus to tuud ku dii woy ka Amoy ku no nigsugu koddi no oghongkai, kandin ka igkadarua no ogtitigus to tuud ku kai.”
Duon songo boi no nigduma no ungod oglangosa no sampulu on no tuid woy darua ka soini no oggoramon din. Agad hontow ka ogtambal kandin, kono ogpakatambal.
buì
Omunaan oglogparan to Magboboot ka mgo otow no kono ogpaagad-agad kandin su sikan ian ka mgo batasan dan. Sikan ian to kono kid ogpaagad-agad to agad hontow no og-imuimu poron kanta to mgo kagi no kono no tu-tuu. Ian su oyow kono kid ogkoubatan.
Di sikanta atag, anak ki to kaawangan no og-awoson to ogkatapid ka goinawa ta. Og-awoson no ogmasalig ka pogtuu ta woy ogdakolon ta ka goinawa ta to mgo otow. No ian ogkounawaan ka kalasag no ogpakaatang to sosolobon ta. Woy og-awoson to og-iman-iman ki to pogpangabang to Magboboot kanta to logpad din no ian ta ogkounawaan ka kalu to sundalu no ig-atang ta kai to ulu ta.
Sikan ian to natagood on mapirisu si Pedro. Di ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus, ungod dan ampui si Pedro to Magboboot.
hari
Ko oglayang ka “twin” ogkonsong on ka ligid din.
Ko dakol ka goinawa ta to Magboboot, kono kid ogkahallok kandin, su ko ogkatibulus on ka goinawa ta kandin, ogkaawo on ka igkahallok ta. Ko duon otow no ogkahallok dod to Magboboot, waro pad natibulus ka goinawa rin to Magboboot woy waro pad makasabut ko songo monu karakol ka goinawa to Magboboot kandin, su duon dod ka igkahallok din ko ogkalogparan dod buwa sikandin.
tutud
umow
li-og
Ian su ka sikan atag no Labow to mgo Talagpanubad kanta, ogpakasabut to tibo no igmalotoy to goinawa ta, su ko kai pad to tano, nool-ologan on sikandin to tibo no igkool-olog to mgo otow. Di sikandin, waro makasalo.
Pinangapanga ka pogsagunut to boi to bulbul din ka ogpaburuton.
borasboras
Warò ki pad makabatuk to maroyow no dalan.
Nigtabak kandan to, “Ogpokohimu koy.” Kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Hoo, ogkoumaan kow to igkoirapi now no ogkounawa to koddi no igkoirapi. Agad sikan ka igbayo now to pogkamatoy now no unawa to koddi no igbayo.
Ko nigtotomog a to kayu no nalotoman on ka hapuy no oglogdog on.
Duon dod si Hisus mgo hibatoon din to dalan no oghondio to Hirusalim. Ko konad amana no mariu sikandan to Hirusalim no marani to mgo lunsud no oghingarnan to Bitpahi woy Bitania, nokouma dio to marani to sikan no malopot no bubungan no oghingaranan to Olibu. Nò, nigsugu ni Hisus ka hibatoon din no darua to oghun-a sikandan.
No su sikan ian, og-awoson ta no ogbayad ki to miuras woy ka duma no bayad no ogbuyu to gobirnu kanta. Woy og-awoson no ogtahud ki to mgo otow no dio to gobirnu, woy og-awoson no ogtahuron ta ka katondanan dan.
Ka tibo no karoyawan to Magboboot, duon to Anak din, no ogsosokod lagboy ka goinawa ran. Oggongonan to Anak din ka kalibutan woy ka langit su ligkat to kabogbogan to kagi rin. Ko nigpakimatoy to lawa rin oyow ogkaawo on ka mgo salo ta oyow ogmalinis on ka goinawa ta, nig-uli dio to langit no nigpinpinnuu on dio to kawanan to Magboboot no ian mabogbog.
battang
Ka otow no nighimu to baloy, ka pogpos-ok to suloy, ogkuò to igbokò to igtukog to suloy.
Woy nigkita kud ka mgo nammatoy; ka mabantug woy ka kono no mabantug, ka nigligkat to dagat woy ka nigligkat to tano woy ka tibo no mgo gimukud to mgo nammatoy no nokougpo to sikan no ugpaan to mgo nammatoy. No namansasindog sikandan tibo dio to tangkaan to sikan no pinnuuanan to pandatuan. Duon tahan no mgo nasulatan no pigbokad on. Woy duon ingkasulat ka tibo no mgo hinimuan to mgo otow no wa pad nammatoy. Woy duon dangob no pigbokad on. No ian ka nasulatan to mgo ngaran to sikan no ogkabogayan to kouyagan no waro katamanan. No ogkabobootan on sikandan tibo ko nokoy ka ingkasulat no mgo hinimuan dan.
Nò, nigmarani ki Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din no nig-inso to, “Manio no nig-anad nu ka mgo otow pinabayo to mgo pananglitan?”
ikul
Si Lukas no doktul no igdakoli noy to goinawa woy si Dimas, songo ogpangumusta kaniu.
Kagi ni Ilias, “Igbuyag ku, nighimatayan dan ka mgo talagnangon to kagi nu. Nanggulak dan ka mgo dogbaan no tubaranan to mgo otow no og-ampu koykow. No sikanak naan do ka nasamo to mgo talagnangon to kagi nu, no songo oghimatayan a ran poron.”
Nò, mgo sulod, tongod to sikan no otow no nakasalo, kono no sikanak ka lagboy no nabogatan to igmasakit to goinawa, di sikaniu ian. Di kono no tibo kaniu ka nasugat to sikan no salo din. No ian to sikan ka ignangon ku su ogkoiniatan ku to kono ogpasublaan ka igmasakit to goinawa rin
No to pogdoromdom ku, sikanami no mgo suguanon ni Hisus, nigbogoy ka Magboboot to ogkaroisok ka mgo ngaran noy su ogtotongtongan koy to tibo no mgo otow woy to tibo no mgo diwata to Magboboot. No ian noy ogkounawaan ka mgo napirisu no nigbobootan on to pogkamatoy.
Nò, ka sagboka to sika darua no otow no makasasalo no nalansang to krus no dio to longod ni Hisus, songo nigsusumpalit kandin to kagi rin to, “Ko sikoykow pa poron ka Im-imanan noy, nò, pangabangi nu ka koykow no lawa, woy sikanami.”
Pogkaponga, nigsugu ni Pilik ka songo kapitan to, “Bantayi nu si Pablo, di kohoy–ui nu ro oyow kono ogkohirapan. Woy ibogoy nu oyow ogpakapanumbaloy ka mgo duma rin su oyow ogkabuligan dan sikandin.”
Omunaan no innangon din soini su ka innangon dongan ni Isaias, ogkatuman on. Nigsulat din bahin ki Hisus no kagi rin,
No nigsakoy on to barku to pog–uli dan dio to lunsud to Antiokia no duon to probinsia to Asia. Sikan ian ka lunsud no pigligkatan dan an–anayan no pig–ampuan on to mgo otow oyow ogbuligan sikandan to Magboboot to sikan no mgo hinimuan dan no napongaan dan on.
Di tongod ki Dimitriu, agad hontow, ogpakapamalogot to maroyow no otow sikandin. No ogkatagaan ta ka sikan su ka batasan din, og-unug on ian to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon. Songo ogpakapamalogot a to maroyow ian sikandin. No nataga ka to tu-tuu ian ka igmalogot ku.
Tayaa now dio’t palanggana ka langosa su ogsolag.
gad nokoy ka ignangon ku, konò ogpa-agad-agad no og-ugpò diò to dangob no anak din.
bantow
Kagi din, “Buyag, kohoy-ui nu bag ka anak ku no lukos. Ogbaboyon sikandin woy ogkabaybayaran lagboy sikandin su malasi ogkoulug dio to hapuy woy dio to woig.
atop
su nataga ki to, ligkat to pog-aguanta ta to sikan no mgo igkool-olog to pogtuu ta, oyow ogkohogotan on.
sukyup
No nigkagian pad ni Hisus ka tagbanwa no nigtugun kandin dio to baloy rin to, “Ko oghimu ka to pagkoonan, kono nud tuguni ka mgo amigu nu, mgo hari nu, mgo kakoy nu, mgo sulod nu woy ko mgo sugkud nu no mgo datu su songo kuwo no songo ogtugonan ka ran to pagkoonan dan no inat ogpokouli do koykow ka ingkabogoy nu.
lig-ot
Nokoy pad, nighutuk nigkagi si Hisus to mgo otow. Kagi rin, “Koddi ka Igbat-ow to goinawa to mgo otow kai to soin no kalibutan. Sikan no otow no ogpasakup koddi, kono no dio to marusilom ka igkabuhi din. Duon kouyagan din no waro katamanan.”
Maroyow to pogpitow
Takas to’gko-on, tolabon
Maroyow ko ogpohipanowon ta on ka mgo otow dio to marani no mgo lunsud, mgo hilit oyow ogpakaboli to ogkoonon dan.
apu-an
lubad
Konò oglabow to koykow no ignangon.
Nò, nigparagas man do nigkagi si Hisus to, “Pamminog kow to kalitukan to pananglitan bahin to otow no nig-orok.
Nighimu ku to sikan su ogkatongawan a ka nighun-a nigtong-ow.
Soini no nalibulung no mgo otow kuntoon no ogpamminog ki Hisus, waro gindawanan dan to Balaod ni Moisis. Ogkoumaan do sikandan to tungayow no ogligkat to Magboboot.”
subò
Nokogdongan to pogkamatoy ni Hisus napori on ka sikan no malayat no makopal no manggad no ig-atang dut gumawan to songo sinabong dio to solod to Dakol no Ampuanan. To napori, dio to ampow nigbunsud taman to diralom. Woy nigdinug ka tano woy napori ka mgo daddakol no mgo batu.
suloy
tanò
Omunaan, nigbogoy ni Pilatu to igpalansang on si Hisus dio to ampow to krus. No nig-alap to mgo sundalu si Hisus dio to ogkamatayan din.
Ka kayu no lawa-an, ko du-on on ogbungul no lagot to lawa-an, ko ogmakogal on, sikan on ka salong no ogkoimu on no ilaw.
Woy nig-inso si Hisus to, “Waro ka naan mogtuu, Pilipi, to Amoy ku woy sikoddi, sagboka ro ka lawa noy? Waro mogligkat to koddi no goinawa ka kagi ku kaniu; nigligkat to Amoy ku no duon kai to koddi. Kandin ian ka ligkatan to oghimuon ku.
Pogkaponga ni Hisus no og-ampu, nignangonan din man do ka mgo hibatoon din to, “Ka koddi no Amoy ka nigbogoy to tibo no katondanan koddi. Woy ka Amoy ku ro ka ogkataga ko hontow a. No unawa, koddi do no Anak din, ogkataga a to Amoy ku ko hontow sikandin. Songo ogkataga ka sika mgo otow no og-alamon ku ko hontow ka Amoy ku.”
Pogkouma nu to baloy nu, oglimuron nu ka mgo amigu nu, mgo sugkud nu no ogkagian nu sikandan to, ‘Bulig kow to karago ku su nigkita kud on ka ayam ku no karniru no nalagak.’ ”
bunbun
“Tibo no mgo koot-otawan, og-usig kaniu su ogtuu kow koddi. Ogdakopon kow to mgo otow woy ighatod kow dio to tangkaan to mgo talagboot oyow oglogparan kow woy oghimatayan pad ka duma su nigtuu kow koddi.
hukab
tipasì
bulung
tu-tù
tallong
pitow
Kagi to mgo talag-anad, mgo Parisiu kuwo ki Hisus, “Maistru, nakitaan ka soin no boi no oghulid to kono no asawa rin.
undongul
ga-an
goinawa
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, ligkat to dakol no goinawa ran kaniu, og-ampuan kow ran su ka dakol no ingkohoy-u now no nigligkat to dakol no pogkohoy-u to Magboboot kaniu.
manipis
biò
Pig-awaan to Magboboot ka kinalabawan no mgo datu no mabantug ka ngaran dan di pigtinuru din ka mgo otow no waro porom bantug dan.
sikandin
kopal
Di si Hisus atag, waro katamanan to kandin no pogpanubad su waro katamanan to pogkouyag din.
Ko du-on ogpamarigus no og-ungod ogtun-uy, sikan ka og-agul-aguloy.
Du-on otow no nigpalatok din ka duma rin to tag-i, di diò dò nakapakang to alabat.
Tingkikan ta dut bangan.
lampakun
kog-os
Ka dakol no goinawa noy kaniu, ogligkat to tu-tuu no nangnangonon no nakatagu to goinawa ta. No agad songo monu kalugoy, kono man ogkaawo kai to goinawa ta.
Ko nokog-ogot ka darua no batò, konò ogpokogtibug sikandan su ogpo-og-ogotoy on.
No to kohop–atan on ka tuid ni Moisis, nakaroromdom sikandin to ogpanumbaloy dio to ugpaan to mgo karumaan din no mgo pinanganak ni Israil. No to pogpanumbaloy ni Moisis dio to kandan,
to
Ka ogmangayow, songo kuò ko hon-om, lalimma woy ko hop-at no otow.
baga
Nigparagas si Hisus to, “Ka ignangon ku kaniu, dakoli nu so goinawa nu to mgo usig nu. Himua now ka maroyow kandan woy pasambaya now sikandan, no kono kow og-iman-iman to ogliwanan dan. Ko sikan ian ka batasan now, dakol ka igkasayo to Magboboot kaniu woy ogpokounawa kow to batasan now to batasan to Magboboot, su songo ogkohoy-uan din ka mgo otow no kono ogpasalamat kandin, woy ogbuligan din dod ka mgo otow no maroot so batasan dan.
Piglimud ni Hisus ka hibatoon din no sampulu woy darua no nigsugu din to mandarua sikandan ka oghipanow no ogwali. Nigbogayan din sikandan to kabogbogan to ogpakarogil to mgo busow no duon to lawa to mgo otow.
kuglung
Songo monu?
“No nanhongkaid on to Sisaria ka mgo Hudiu. No pogkapawo on, niglimudlimud sikandan dio to kanak woy nig–agpas ku ro impaangoy si Pablo no nigpinpinnuu ad on su ogbobootan kud on sikandin.
gabà
“Agad ko nasundug kow kai to kalibutan to mgo otow no waro pad nigtuu, sumsumana now no sikoddi ian ka nokohun-a no nasundug.
“Hisus no taga Nasarit, nokoy ka tuud nu kanami no mgo busow? Og-inso a koykow ko ian nu inghongkai oyow oglogparan koy nikoykow? Natagaan ku sikoykow. Koykow ka Matuwarong no pigsaligan to Magboboot.”
mara
Toptop, ka ogsokodsokod; warò ogmalayat
tinduk
Dokad di, dakol ka ingkohoy-u to Magboboot kanta woy indakoli kid ian to goinawa rin.
lalad
Ogsala-an ta ka lagut no diò to palangana. Ka lagut diò to woig ka ogkasalà.
hallok
dulug
nugun
Ko du-on mgo buyag no ogpanangnangonoy, du-on batò no ogpagindahag ka ogpamminog.
langosa
Ungod now ro doromdoma ka nangnangonon no nigdinog now tongod ki Hisu Kristu no nigtuuan now an-anayan. Ko ungod now ro ogdoromdomon ka sikan no nangnangonon no nigdinog now to kabinunsuran to nigtuu kow, songo og-ungod kow ro ogpakarumaruma to Anak to Magboboot. Woy songo ogpakarumaruma kow rod to Amoy rin no dio to Langit.
Kagi ni Hisus to mgo hibatoon din, “No sikaniu atag, nokoy ka kaniu no tabak? Hontow a to kaniu no goinawa?” Nigtabak si Pedro to, “Sikoykow, ka Kristu no Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan to Igdatu noy uromo,” kagi ni Pedro.
Ka po-it, ka alu-an woy ka pantat, ogparagas ogko-otow ka igpanganak dan.
Dongan, nigkagian to Magboboot ka kaap-apuan ta no ian ka mgo Hudiu. No ka mgo talagnangon to kinagian din ka impakagi rin kandan. Di ka batasan din to igpohitaga rin kandan to kinagian din, nigloinloin.
Nig-ulug ni Antoniu ka anggam ku
himamat
Natagaan dan to nanbawi si Hisus to mohon-ing no mgo otow. Sikan ian no napipi sikandin porom to sikan no mgo nigmandaralu oyow ogsamsam sikandan ki Hisus oyow ogkabawian.
Ogbogayan ka mgo nigtuu to kabogbogan to oghimu to mgo koin-inuan. Ogpakarogil sikandan to mgo busow no nigsolod to lawa to mgo otow ko oghingaranan dan ka koddi no ngaran. Ka dangob, ogpakakagi to loin no mgo kinagian.
Di ka amoy rin, nig-umow rin ka mgo suguonon din woy nigsugu to, ‘Agpas kow, angoy kow to maroyow lagboy no kinabo woy saluubi now ka anak ku, woy puruta now ka sising no igsaluub now to bolad din woy mgo sapatus no igsaluub now to paa rin,
Kagi ni Hisus, “Koddi ka ogpakimatoy to salo to mgo otow no soini woig to ubas ka langosa ku no ogpatulaug ku no ian ka igtuus to poghiroson ka iam no insabut to Magboboot dio to mgo otow.
Utù, du-on so-in kinabò no ongod nu rò bua ian.
No, nighipanow on si Hisus. Pogligkat din do, duon songo lukos no nigpallaguy dio to kandin woy nigluhud to tangkaan din. Kagi rin ki Hisus to, “Maistru, maroyow ka no otow. Nangoni a ko nokoy ka litos no oghimuon ku oyow ogkabogayan a to kouyagan no waro katamanan?”
Nò, nabawian ni Hisus ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no duon loinloin no oggoramon dan woy nandogil din ka mgo busow no nigsolod to diralom to duma no mgo otow. Wa din pakagia ka mgo busow su nigtokod dan to sikandin ka Anak to Magboboot.
Soini no igbuyag, nighutuk nigsugu to duma no mgo suguanon din. Kagi, ‘Nangoni now ka tibo no nigtugunan ku to magaan kow ro su nighimatayan kud ka mgo baka woy ka mgo inpalambog ku no mgo nati to baka. Nalutu ka tibo. Hondini kow on to pagkoonan to kasal’.
Ian su duon ingkasulat ni Dabid dongan tongod ki Hudas to, ‘Balagad ko ogkoongkoran on ka ugpaan din oyow waro otow no ogpokougpo duon,’ Woy kagi rin to, ‘Balagad ko songo otow on ka ogpurut to katondanan din.’ ” Pogkaponga, kagi ni Pedro to,
Nò, ko nootawan on si Hisus, pigdoromdom to mgo hibatoon din to soin no innangon din. Nò, nigtuuan on ka impasulat to Magboboot dut Tahan no Kasulatan woy ka kagi ni Hisus.
lambog
Ka boi, nigbosì din ka so-og no du-on imbayò ka kommag no inpilak to usig din.
bugoù
Di pamminog kow. Duon ignangon ku kaniu no nokani ingkoholos di kuntoon igpasabut to Magboboot to kono kinow pad ogkamatoy tibo ka nigtuu ki Hisus ko oglibong sikandin kai to soi kalibutan, di tibo kinow ogkaliwanan to lawa ta.
pangatubung
anga
Du-on bulu no songo lobut no naro-ogan to kayu no lopuk no nabalisò.
tongod
Ian to ognangonan ku sikaniu to soini, su ogkoiniatan ku to oyow ogkataga kow to ogpoomotan kud on ian ka soini no oghimuon ku kaniu, woy ka igbulig ku to mgo otow no nigtuu no dio to lunsud to Laodisia, woy ka dio to agad hondoi no ugpaan no songo waro pad makatilala kanak.
Ka otow no nighimu to baloy rin, og-omotan din to ogtapus ka oghimu su ugpa-an din on.
Ian su nigdatong on ka allow to pogdagsang to igkabolu to Magboboot kanami no kono noy ogkaaguanta.”
No nig-agpas ni Elena ka kiambù no nigsolod a oyow konò a ogkasogod.
na-an dò
Ogbuyu koy to igpapitow nu ka kabogbogan nu oyow duon ogpakabulung to mgo masakiton woy oyow duon ogkohimu noy no mgo kabolbolonganan woy ka mgo indanan no igmalogot to kinagian nu su ligkat to kabogbogan to ngaran ni Hisus, no ian ka maroyow no suguanon nu no waro salo.”
simba
bitu-on
tag songo
no woy impalibuwas on woy si Hasun, nakabayad on sikandan to salapi no igbayad to mgo lawa ran.
agad hontow
Hagtongid to ogkagi su ogko-opos on ka goinawa ku koykow no ogpaka-atu ad koykow.
lumotik
Ka homoy no insabuk to lirong, ogkaboya rò ko du-on og-ulingol no mgo batò.
toin
bosì
go-on
Ko du-on oggaraba to batu, sikan ka ogpangatkat.
Ko ogkalasing ki no subla ka pog-imun ta ogkatabolog ki.
Inogo on no nigbobootan ad to Gimukud to Magboboot, no nig-alap a to diwata to Magboboot dio to lipupukan to matikang lagboy no bubungan woy impapitow rin kanak ka Hirusalim no ian ka Dakol no Lunsud to Magboboot no ogpohulughulug dio to tano no ogligkat to langit no ligkat to Magboboot.
gagow
Nigmapipitawoy on ka mgo hibatoon din no nasasow sikandan su kono ogpakasabut ko hontow ka tuud to kagi rin.
Ian ka kagi ku, mgo sulod, su woy ro ogtokoron ka otow to maroyow ka batasan din, ko ka Magboboot ka ogsayo kandin, kono no ka otow ka ogsayo to kandin no unoy no lawa.
amulatok
No nigbogayan ka mgo talangas to oyow ogbayadbayad to mgo otow taman to lalimma no bulan. Di waro bogayi sikandan to oghimatoy to mgo otow. No ka igkabaybayari ran, ian nounawaan ka sikan no igkabaybayari to otow no ogkakagat to salipitsipit.
Kausing poron na-uug
kurul
Ko du-on ogkoirapan no otow no oghondiò to songo baloy, nigpabulig sikandin.
Di ko duon anak dan woy ko apu dan, og-awoson dan to og-anad to oghunnoon dan to ogdoromdomon to ogbogoy to igkatahud dan to inoy ran woy ko amoy ran, mgo apu dan oyow igbalos dan kandan to nigtagouro pad kandan ko bato pad sikandan su soini ka batasan no ogkoiniatan to Magboboot.
salà
Sikan ian to, ka mgo otow no nigtuu no dio to Antiokia, nasagboka ka doromdom dan to ogpanangana to igpaalap dan no igbulig dan dio to mgo otow no nigtuu no ogkohirapan no dio to probinsia to Hudia. No ko songo monu ka ingkohimu no igbogoy to tag sagboka no otow, sikan ian ka igkapaalap dan.
Di ko kono ogtinawo kaniu dio to datongan now porom woy ko kono ogsagman ka mgo otow to nangnangonon now, topungi now ka basak duon to paa now no hipanow kow on. Sikan ian ka igpatokod now to mgo otow to warad labot now to sikan no lunsud ko oglogparan sikandan to Magboboot.”
Pogtubu to maroyow no mgo boni, songo nigtubu ka sika hilamunon. To naboros on ka tibo no pinamula, nigtokod to mgo otow to songo duon hilamunon no nigtubu.
Kono og-awoson to ogsulatan ku sikaniu, mgo sulod, tongod to sikan no igbogoy now no igpaalap now dio to mgo nigtuu no dio to Hudia.
Ka tikò, songo ogdungko-dungkò ko oggongonan ta ka lawa rin.
No kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag ki Moisis to, ‘Awaa nu ka sapatus nu no itahud kanak su duon a kai to longod nu.
si Huana no ian asawa ni Kusa no sikan ka talagbantoy to kalaglagan to gobirnador dan no si Hirodis. Duon dod si Susana, woy mohon-ing dod ka duma no mgo boi. Sikandan ian ka nigbulig ki Hisus mgo duma rin su duon litos no igbulig dan.
agbot
Nò, niglibong sikandin man do dio to mgo hibatoon din di nohirogo su napuow lagboy sikandan.
bonnal
Ko maro-ot ka bagtù to otow, konò din ogto-od su ogkahawiran sikandin.
nangon
bigut
Ka babuy, songo ogka-alow.
Ian su, konad on ka pogtuman ta poron to Balaod ka dalan no ogpakamaroyow poron kanta dio to tangkaan to Magboboot su nig-awo ni Hisu Kristu ka sikan no dalan to oyow agad hontow no ogtuu kandin, ogkohimu on no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.
Ka turak no kayu, ogkasingsing on to og-orok no oghutukan ta to oggalangan
Si Hisus ka igmakogal to soini no baloy oyow kono ogkagulak. No ka sikan, ogkohimu on no baloy to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus no duon ta ian ogkasayo sikandin.
Kagi ran ki Pedro to, “Dio koy nigligkat ki Kapitan Kornilio. Maroyow no otow sikandin woy ogsimboon din ka Magboboot. Ogtahuron sikandin to tibo no mgo Hudiu. No ian noy inghongkai su duon diwata to Magboboot no nigsugu ki Kornilio to oyow ogpohongkai koy on no ogpaangoy koykow. Igparuma ka dio to baloy rin oyow ogpakapamminog koy ko nokoy ka ignangonnangon nu kanami.”
Ko duon goinawa rin no kono din lang-ubon, og-alam sikandin ka mgo ogsuguon din no ogpatagbu to sika dangob no labow no igbuyag ko mariu pad to oyow ogkohusoy ran do.
til-asi a to timun
kutòn
digkit
Pamanoug kad on, woy kono ka ogduwaruwa to ogduma kandan su pigsugu ku sikandan kai,” kagi to Gimukud to Magboboot.
kogò
Nigsoilang sikandin no nakakita to maputi no imbukus dan to lawa di waro mogsolod to pilang.
Di ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu, duma to mgo talag-anad to Balaod, dio do nigsasindog to marani ki Hisus no nigbaghotan dan ka kagi ran no imbayung dan kandin.
katu-onan
Naan ni Ipag no igparuma nu ka anak nu kanami.
Songo duon ingkasulat dongan no kagi ni Isaias to: “Duon uromo pinanganak ni Isai no ogpokohondii: sikandin ka ogsugu to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. No sikandin ka ogkohimu on no Im-imanan dan.”
bonnal
tamà
Kono no sikan do su dakol ka igkarago ta to Magboboot no ogligkat ki Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no nigpoul-ulioy to goinawa ta to Magboboot.
Og-uyagon to Magboboot ka namatoy su oyow ogkootawan on. Agad koddi no Anak din, songo og-uyagon ku ka agad hontow no ogkoiniatan ku to og-uyag.
Ogpohirapan ku ka lawa ku woy ogponoron ku oyow ogkaanad. Ian su kakuwo a ko ogkapongaan kud ka pog-anad ku to duma no mgo otow di mangkuwan ko ogpakasalo ad no kono ad on ogkabogayan to igsayo.
Nò, nig-insaan a to sagboka no pogbuyagon. Kagi rin to, “Hontow ka soini no mgo otow no ogpanginabo to mamaputi? Woy taga hondoi sikandan?”
Unawa to sundalu no og-aguanta to igkabaybayari rin, songo aguantaa nu ro ka igkabaybayari nu no ogligkat to maroyow ka no suguanon ni Hisu Kristu
No ligkat to nigpaagad-agad kow on to soini no tu-tuu no nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu, nigmaawang on ka goinawa now su naawo on ka maroot no mgo batasan now. Woy kuntoon, duon on ka tu-tuu ian no dakol no goinawa now to mgo duma now no songo ogtuu. No og-awoson to waro maroot no ogpakasolug to sikan no igparakdakoli now kandan to goinawa.
Nò, napulas on ka mata ran no pigtokod dan on si Hisus di magaan do ian no waro dan on kitaa.
Poglogsad dan on, nigtokod on ka mgo otow ki Hisus.
tulù
lambid
Ka sikan, ogkounawa ian to impasulat dongan to Magboboot. Kagi rin to, “Dakol ka igbogoy to Magboboot dio to mgo naayuayu. Waro katamanan to igkohoy-u rin.” Ian ka kagi rin.
Ka sob-ung no kalan, maga-an ogkara-at
“Nò,” kagi ni Hisus, “pogkalugoy no nig-uli ka sika igbuyag no nig-alap to katondanan din no nohimu on no Labow no Igbuyag. Pogkouma rin, nigsugu no oyow igpoumow on ka mgo suguonon no pigsaligan din to salapi din su oyow ogkatagaan din ko songo monu ka ingkatimul ligkat to pogpatulin dan.”
bunlug
uran
Pinabayo to mgo pananglitan, mohon-ing ka in-anad din kandan. Kagi rin to, “Duon otow no nighondio to kamot din to og-orok.
limusong
ulaluy
Ian su oyow, tagood to ogpokougpo kow pad kai to kalibutan woy ogpakataliwaro kow to mgo otow no maroot no makasasalo, di waro solug no maroot dio to goinawa now woy waro igkoogot kaniu su ogmaroyow tibo ka mgo batasan now su nohimu kow on no mgo anak to Magboboot. No sikan ian no ogkabat-awan now sikandan no ogkounawa kow to mgo bituon no oglayag dio to langit su
Ko ogpalawod ki to gakit diò to dibabò, ko og-ulì ki ogganuyon ta rò ka gakit ta to ogsubò.
goti
No to pogpitow ku to lawa to sikan no magintalunan, ogkoiling to dakol woy mabatok no miow no oghingaranan to liupardu. Ka paa rin, ogkoiling to paa to dakol no magintalunan no oghingaranan to usu. Ka bo-bo din, ogkoiling to bo-bo to liun. No ka ulod no oghingaranan to daragun, nigbogayan din ka sikan no magintalunan to kabogbogan din woy to ogpinpinnuu to pinnuuanan to pandatuan woy to dakol no katondanan din.
Si Ka-in, nigpa-awayan din ka hari din to poghimatoy.
ogbuyù
Nokani, nabalagad dan poron ka igkamatoy ran no ogligkat to pogpangabang dan kanak. Dakol ka pogpasalamat ku woy ki Akila. Di kono no sikanak do ka ogpasalamat kandan, di songo ogpakapasalamat ka tibo no ogman-ampu ki Hisus kai longod no kono no Hudiu.
Woy songo nakaroromdom a to og-awoson no igpouli ku dio to kaniu ka sulod tanow to pogtuu no si Ipaproditu no impabulig now kai to kanak. Sikandin, nounawa ko karumaan ku pa no sundalu su nigpoomot to nigbulig kanak to soini no igpohimu to Magboboot kanak.
No, niglimudlimud ka mohon-ing no mgo otow dio to baloy rin no waro ogkaliotan dan duon to gumawan no ogwali si Hisus kandan. Ko ogwali pad, nokouma ka hop-at no mgo lukos no ogloungan dan duon to hibatanan din ka sagboka no lukos no nigkolog so lawa rin. Si Hisus ka tuud dan.
saligkat
hikot
Ka aubakbakoy, ogmarani on ogpokog-unawa to inoy ka karakol.
soluton
sibow
Wà ka tokora su niglobag ka bo-bò nu.
pingul
Hoo su sikaniu ian ka ogkasayo noy woy ka igkarago noy.
Waro porom nakasalo sikandan to waro nigtuu koddi ko wara a moghondini woy nig-anad ku sikandan. Di to nignangonan kud on, kuntoon, konad on ogpakabalibad sikandan to duon salo dan.
Waro dan matagoi ka batasan no ogpakabogoy to maawang no pog-ugpo.
Ko ogdokdokon ka batu no apoga, ogkohimu no ogka-apug.
Agad pila.
Di nigtabak ni Hisus kandan to, “Oghipanow kinow dio to mgo dangob no mgo lunsud oyow ogwali a dio su ian ka tuud ku to poghondini ku.”
kinitkinit
tulin
Ka kamot no og-urananan to songo allow, oggos-ang ko tatolu no allow no igdampil. Ogmaraging ka mgo lapok ko ogkadi-okan ta.
woy to oyow konad on ogpamminog sikandan to mgo tigbal do no nangnangonon tongod to minuna to mgo Hudiu woy ka igsugu to mgo otow no ogligal to tu-tuu ian no ingkaanad.
Nò, nighondio si Hisus to lunsud no Bitania no niglopow to baloy ni Simon no oghingaranan to ibungon, di nabawian on sikandin.
Ko oglanog ka woig, ogkaba-ad on su ogpakabayò diò to siak.
lilid
Ian dan umaag ka kandan no hinimuan no maro-ot.
Maroyow so aporu ko warò igka-aras.
golgol
bokidding
kalawit
“Ko marusilom ka iglibong ku uromo kai to kalibutan, ko duon darua no otow no ogpohuhuliroy, sagboka ka ogbatunon to Magboboot. Ka dangob, ogkagalat do.
Nigkagian ni Hisus ka dangob no otow to, “Duma ka koddi.” Di nigkagi to sikan no otow ki Hisus to, “Paag-agari a nu pa ko og-uli a pad oyow iglobong ku pad ka amoy ku.”
Ko pananglitan du-on oghimuon ta di ko du-on igkasasow ta, na-akoban ka oghimuon ta porom no an-anayan no na-aloy ki diò to dangob no warò ta nato-ori.
Ka otow no og-ayad-ayad ogtuman to pogsugu to igbuyag din ko ogsaligan sikandin to doisok, songo ogkasaligan to dakol. Songo unawa ka otow no kono ogkasaligan to doisok, songo kono ogkasaligan to dakol.
ogung
lagting
Woy songo nignangon kow no ko duon otow no ognangon to hogot no igpangulibot din ka tubaranan to Dakol no Ampuanan oyow ogtuuan ka kagi din, waro salo din ko kono din ogkatuman ka sika hogot no innangon din. Di ko duon otow kun no igpangulibot din no oghingaranan din ka sikan no igtubad dio to tubaranan, duon salo din ko kono din ogtumanon ka innangon din.
Nig-a-alig sikandan su nokog-un-unawa goinawa ran. Nokogsabut ka sikan. Nokog-iniatoy. Nokogso-ob ka alig dan no darua.
obol
koblò
No ka sikan no boi, nigluyud kanami ki Pablo no nigbabansagon ka nigkagi to, “Suguanon to Lagboy no Magboboot ka soini no mgo otow no ian inhongkai kanta su oyow ognangnangonan ki ko ogmomonu ki oyow ogkapangabangan kinow to mgo salo ta.”
Ko ogdatong ad on dio to kaniu, litos no igbogoy now ka salapi ko hontow ka ogkasaligan now. Pogkaponga, igbogoy ku kandan ka sulat no igpatilaa dio to Hirusalim woy igpaalap ku kandan ka igpabogoy now to mgo nigtuu dio.
Ka otow no konò og-atu, ognanganan to otow no mabulut to, “Liason ka na-an.”
tugsuk
Sagdok ka pà
Duon dod dangob no pananglitan din. Kagi, “Ko iam ka inumanon, kono ta igtagu dio to tahan no taguanan no nohimu to laplap to ayam su ko ogtulin ka inumanon ogbotu ka sikan no tahan no taguanan no ogkaraat no warad pulus to sikan no taguanan woy naraat ka inumanon. Ian do litos ko igtagu ta ka iam no inumanon dio to songo iam no taguanan su ogkalanat pad ka sikan no nohimu to iam no laplap to ayam.”
Di si Maria atag, dio do to goinawa rin ka tibo no nigdinog din no malasi rin do doromdoma.
To diad on sikandan to taliwaro to lanow natokow sikandan to kalamag no dakol, no nasoloran on ka balutu dan to woig puun to dakol no luwak. Di nohirogo do atag si Hisus.
Oghinarang ki to hapuy ko oghagsilan ki ko marani on ogkapawò.
To ogtalipag pad sikandan, nohirogo atag si Hisus. Nò, natokow on sikandan to dakol no kalamag woy dakol no luwak no ogkasoloran porom ka balutu dan to woig no og-anlod poron. Ogkoirapan sikandan.
ulaging
Ogmoon-ing ka oghibukhibuk no mgo alibutod.
sakug
lalag
Hontow naan ka sikan no mgo otow no nigdinog to kagi to Magboboot di nigligal nasi to kagi rin ko kono no sikan no mgo otow no nakaawo to ugpaan to Ehipto dongan no si Moisis ka nig-alap kandan?
No kagi ni Agripa ki Pistu to, “Ko waro pa nignangon si Pablo to ogpohondioon nud ki Igbuyag Sisar oyow si Sisar ka ogboboot kandin, ogkohimu porom no sikanta ka ogpalibuwas kandin.”
Woy rin ogka-abin ko ogkapurut din on.
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Sikaniu, ko duon karniru nu no ko ogkoulug dio to lungag ko Allow to Oghimoloy, og-insa a ko hontow naan kaniu no kono oghonat ka sikan no ayam nu agad Allow to Oghimoloy.
Songo monu
doromdom
di-ok
Sikan ian, ipariralom now ka goinawa now to Magboboot no ian mabogbog. No ko allow on no litos to kandin no goinawa, ogdakolon din ka kaniu no ngaran.
Ko du-on diò to songo barrio on ka ogka-alap, inat to mgo sakup din tibò.
tu-on
batò
gampas
gutas
luhud
Pogkouma ran to songo tano no ian ighingaran dan to kinagian dan to “Bokog to Ulu,” dio dan do langsangi si Hisus to kayu no krus no pig-onow ran on, woy songo niglansang dan ka darua no tulisan dio to mgo krus no pinoglimang ki Hisus ka sika mgo makasasalo.
so-og
obul
Mohon-ing dod ka mgo nighimu ni Hisus. Ko ogsulatan ka papil to tibo, kono no litos buwa ka soin no kalibutan to ogtaguan to sikan no mgo diblu.
manoomsoom ki
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Kagi to Magboboot no ingkasulat dongan to: ‘Ko now ol-ologi ka Lagboy no Igbuyag now no ian ka Magboboot,’ ” kagi ni Hisus.
bulan
Pig-ongkoran ni Hisus ka nalibulung no mgo otow, niglopow sikandin dut baloy. Nanundul kandin ka mgo hibatoon din, no kagi ran kandin to, “Nangoni koy to kalitukan to hilamunon dio to kamot no innangon nu to pananglitan nu.”
Ko niglibod ka bunal to kayu, nigbodbod din.
aguanta
oggoram
balabagan
pinnu-u
Woy kono now kasasawi ka agad nokoy. Di ampu kow ro to Magboboot woy buyua now kandin ka mgo og-awoson now. No ko og-ampu kow, iglagkos now ro ka pogsayo now kandin.
No to pogligkat noy, nignanoynanoy ka barku. Napilaan koy on ka nigpanag–ilis no bali naan no nakaligad koy on to lunsud to Nidu. Di nohirapan koy lagboy no waro koy maayun to ogliput to koopusan to pulu to Krita su naatangan koy to kalamag. Sikan ian to dio koy makabayo to limang no ogkaalindungan no duon to marani to Salmun.
No, ka mgo lukos no nigbantoy ki Hisus, nigsusumpalit woy nigbarasan dan sikandin.
Ka Gimukud to Magboboot dod ka ogbogoy to songo otow to kabogbogan din to oghimu to mgo kabolongbolongan. No to dangob, ogbogoy to oyow igkanangon din ka kagi no ogligkat to Magboboot no insabuk din to goinawa to sikan no otow. Woy ogbogayan din ka dangob to oyow ogkatokod din ko hondoi ogligkat ka kabogbogan, ko dio to Magboboot woy ko dio to loin. No to duma no otow, ogbogayan din oyow ogpakakagi to loinloin no mgo kinagian no waro maanari. No to dangob, ogbogayan to oyow ogkalituk din ka ingkanangonnangon to sikan no mgo kinagian.
gongon
Nò, ka igbuyag to mgo sundalu, nigpasolod din on si Pablo dio to baloy woy insugu din to ogpabarasan dan oyow ogpakanangon poron si Pablo ko manio to nigbabansagonan ka mgo otow kandin.
Si Ipaparas no duma ku no songo napirisu su ligkat to pogtuu rin ki Hisu Kristu, ogpanangon to ogpangumustoon din sikoykow, Pilimun.
No duon ka mgo sundalu dio no songo nig-inso ki Huan to, “Sikanami naan, songo nokoy ka litos no oghimuon noy?” Kagi ni Huan kandan to, “Ko kow ogpanakow. Kono kow on oghinallok to mgo otow no igpogos now kandan to salapi dan oyow igbogoy ran kaniu. Agad kono now ogbayungi to kono no malogot. No ka dangob no ignangon ku kaniu no mgo sundalu, tukawi now ka salapi no igbayad to gobirnu kaniu.”
songo puntuk
hogot
Ko nakaponga nigkagi si Hisus, nigtagpi to sagboka no talagbantoy kandin no kagi rin kandin, “Umba bag sikoykow su oglangub ka no ogtabak to soin no buyag to talagpanubad?”
Ka mgo lugì to tabunan to takubung, ogpoglawanglawangon diò to diralom to oghimuan dan to salag.
Nokoy so igtalosob kanak?
Kono ogtubù ka agoloy su og-ian to kayagkag.
Sabolan a dò woy ni Andì.
Songo allow, ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus, nanlimudlimud on dio to songo holonganan no oghingaranan dan to Balukon ni Solomon no duon to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu. No mohon–ing ka mgo kabolongbolonganan woy ka mgo indanan no igmalogot to kinagian to Magboboot no nohimu to mgo suguanon ni Hisus.
No si Hirodis, natimulan din pad ka salo din su impapirisu rin on si Huan.
Ko nanpinnuu on ka tibo, pigpurut ni Hisus ka sikan no lalimma no malison no paan mgo darua no malison no ngalap to woig. Poglonghag dio to langit, nigsalamatan din ka Magboboot. No ko naponga, niglotiblotib ni Hisus ka sika mgo malison no paan no imbogoy rin to mgo hibatoon din oyow iglogoblogob dan dio to mgo otow. Sunud, nigtaad din on pad ka ngalap to woig no nalutu on.
Kò ta ogtibugan ka manuk to atolug.
To pogkouma woy ni Hisus to baloy ni Hairu, wa din palopawa ka duma no mgo otow. Ian do nakaruma ki Hisus si Pedro, si Huan, si Santiago woy ka inoy mgo amoy to sika bato no namatoy.
Ko du-on og-indanan ku no kuddò, ogbogoy a to babuy no igpohun-a ku.
Nigtabak ka suguonon to, ‘Ka hari nu, nokouma kuntoon no allow. Sikan ian to nigpohimatayan to amoy nu ka malambog no nati to baka su narago to nokouli dod ka anak din to maroyow rod so lawa rin.’ Sikan ka kagi to suguonon dan.
Ko ogtu-uron to ogbuturon ki, ogpisukon ka mata ta.
Kasiù ka manggad
Pogkita rin ka songo malison no lagboy no maroyow rin to ogpitow no mahal ian, nig-uli woy imbaligya din ka tibo no kalaglagan din no nigboli rin on ka sikan no perlas.”
“Bogayi now ka mgo otow to og-awoson dan no songo ogbogayan kow to Magboboot. Di ka igbogoy rin kaniu, kono din do igpo-unawa to imbogoy now. Ko nokoy ka insokod now to igbogoy now to songo otow, ogpasublaan din pad ka igbogoy rin kaniu. Ogkounawa pananglitan, ko duon homoy no igtagu to liang, ogkaguon din pad woy ogdasokon din woy ogpasublaan din. Di ko malintok atag ka igbogoy now to duma now, songo malintok ka igbogoy to Magboboot kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus.
‘Ka langit, ian ka pinnuuanan ku to pandatuan. No ka tano, ian diokanan ku. Sikan ian to kono ogkohimu no oghimu kow to baloy no ogkougpaan ku. Woy waro agad hontow no ogpokohimu kanak to himolayanan ku,’ kagi to Magboboot.’
dani
dugukan
Woy duon to sikan no mgo nigtuu ka nokani nighimu to mgo pamulingan no nigligkat to bogbog to mgo busow. Woy duon mgo diblu ran to pog–anad to sikan no mgo pamulingan. No nan–alap dan on ka sikan no mgo diblu no dio dan silabi ka tibo duon to tangkaan to tibo no mgo otow no nalimud. Nigsool dan pad ka imbayad dan to sikan no mgo diblu no nasool to kalimmaan no malan to kandan no salapi.
duluc
kiang
Banbanayan nu naboli ka wasoy su nig-awos nu to og-itu-os ka pirisiu din.
Ka mgo hibatoon ni Huan no Talagbautismu, nigdinog to tibo soini no mgo hinimuan ni Hisus no dio dan nangoni si Huan to pirisuan.
Ko nataman on ka sikan no tatolu no tuid woy hon-om no bulan, nig-ampu nighutuk si Ilias no nigbuyu to oyow og-uran. Pogkaponga on to nig-ampu, nig-uran on woy nouyag on ka agad nokoy no nigtubu kai to tano.
lagboy no maapun
nokoy
Du-on otow maga-an ogpanungayow ko ogkabolu` to duma rin
go-on
Tulisi a, Kunsay, to baluy su totoytoy ad to ogtago-od ad.
Nò, to songo poglimud man do ni Hisus woy to mgo suguanon din, pignangonan din sikandan to, “Kono kow pad og–awo to soini no lunsud to Hirusalim. Di tagad kow pa to ogkabogayan kow on to Gimukud to Magboboot su sikan ian ka innangon ku kaniu nokani no impasabut to Amoy ku no dio to Langit kaniu.
Duon ka sagboka no igbuyag to mgo Hudiu no oghingaranan to mgo Parisiu. Si Nikodimu ka ngaran din.
Ko ma-allow, ogmatikang on ka allow.
Ka sikan, ogkohimu no pananglitan. Ian su ka sikan no daruwa no boi, igkapanag-iling to daruwa no sabut no imbogoy to Magboboot. Ka sagboka no sabut, ian ogkoilingan si Agar su uripon sikandin woy ka mgo anak din. No ka mgo otow no nasakup to Balaod no imbogoy to Magboboot ki Moisis dio to Sinai, songo ogkounawa rod to uripon.
Nigtapa ka kuddò.
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, to nakadoromdom a to og-awoson to ogbuyu a to oyow ogpohunoon ku ka soini no tatolu no sulod ta oyow ogkalimud now on igpanoy ka sikan no innangon now nokani no igbogoy now su oyow ko ogpokouma ad on, duon on ka impanagana now. Ian su oyow ogkataga ka mgo otow to tu-tuu ian to nigligkat to kaniu no goinawa to ogbogoy no waro kow pogosa.
Tantanuri now ka mgo boi no nabalu no waro ogkasaligan dan to pog-ugpo dan.
latoy
dulug
Di, agad hontow ka ogsumpaliton to Gimukud to Magboboot, konad ian ogpasayluon ka sikan no otow su waro katamanan to sikan no salo.”
talò
No to nig-ampu pad si Hisus duon ka diwata no suguanon to Magboboot no nigpuun dio to Langit no niglibuwas ki Hisus no nigbuligan din ka goinawa ni Hisus.
Duon dangob no pananglitan ni Hisus. Kagi rin to, “Ka iam no inumanon, kono ta igtagu dio to tahan no taguanan no nohimu to laplap to ayam su ko ogtulin on ka inumanon, ogbotu ka sikan no tahan no taguanan no ogkaraat ka inumanon woy songo ogkaraat ka taguanan.
Ka ignangon ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “ka otow no ogparakoldakol ka kandin no katondanan, nasi no ogpakariralom sikandin, di ka otow no kono og-abin to dakol no katondanan din ogpakaampow sikandin.”
hiporong
amagdial
Ka buyagbuyag no mgo boi, songo udlingi nu sikandan oyow ogdoyroyawon dan ka mgo batasan dan oyow litos to boi no nigtuu on ki Hisus. Og-awoson to kono ogpanalosob to agad hontow woy to kono dan oglasinglasing. Woy og-awoson to maroyow ka ig-anad dan to mgo boi no bato pad kandan
Nò, nigtabak si Hisus kandin no kagi rin to, “Igi,” kagi rin, “dakol lagboy ka pogsalig nu koddi. Igbogoy ku koykow ka nigbuyu nu.” No, paragas noulian ka anak to boi.
Nò, nigsasindog on ka tibo no mgo nalimud no mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu no nig-alap dan si Hisus dio to baloy ni Pilatu no ian gobirnador dan no sakup to Ruma.
Pogkaponga on ka sika allow to pagkoonan, nanhipanow on si Husi woy si Maria su og-uli on. Dokad di to nagalat do ka bato no si Hisus dio to Hirusalim no waro mataga ka amoy rin darua to inoy rin to waro naan makaruma si Hisus kandan.
golì
pusù
sanggì
Sikan do ka kagi rin kanak,” kagi ni Kornilio, “No nig–agpas ad on nigpaangoy koykow. Maroyow lagboy su nighongkai kad. No kuntoon, nalimud koy on tibo kai to tangkaan to Magboboot su oyow ogpakapamminog koy to tibo no insugu to Magboboot koykow no igpanangonnangon kanami,” kagi ni Kornilio.
Uyamu a to susugba.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan. Kagi rin, “Koddi ian ka sikan no paan no igkabuhi to mgo otow. Sikan no otow no ogtuu koddi, konad oggutasan woy sikan no mgo ogtuu koddi, konad ogkoibog no og-inum.
nangon
dayandayan
Di kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus to, “Hondio kad su si Saulo, ian ka pig–alam ku no ogpatokod to ngaran ku dio to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, woy dio to dakol no mgo igbuyag to mgo labow no mgo ugpaan. Woy songo ignangonnangon din dio to mgo Hudiu no ian pinanganak ni Israil.
Nigmaam-amutoy si Simon Pedro, si Tomas no oghingaranan to soping, si Natanial no taga Kana no sakup to Galilia, ka darua no anak ni Sibidiu, woy songo darua no hibatoon ni Hisus, tibo, nigmaam-amutoy.
arab
pungusan
Duon dod allow no ogkitoon now atag ka sika makahallokhallok no dorooti no ogsasindog dio to kono no sasindoganan din dio to Dakol no Ampuanan. Nò, agad hontow, ko ogbasa ka to soini, ay-ayari nu to ogbasa oyow ogpakasabut kow. Ko ogkitoon now ka soin no dorooti, kaniu no rio to Hudia, og-awos to ogsalsalia kow dio to kabubunganan.
mi-mì
“Nò man,” kagi ni Hisus kandan, “manio naan to wa kow pad makasabut?”
aloy
Ka sagboka ro namatoy si Hisus no nigtobus to salo to tibo no mgo otow. No ka sikan, niglitos to tibo no salo ta. Sikan ian, konad on ogkamatoy ogkohutuk si Hisus no ogtobus to mgo salo ta. Nouyag on sikandin no kuntoon, ligkat to mgo hinimuan din, ogkasayo on ka Magboboot.
Songo kagi rin “Ko hondoi no baloy ka ogdatongan now, palinggalat kow dio taman to oghipanow kow on.
Nataga on si Hisus to og-insaan dan porom sikandin to kalitukan to kagi rin. Nò, kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandan, “Nignangonan kud to ‘Kono ogkalugoy no kona a now ogkitoon woy songo kono ogkalugoy no ogkitoon a now man do.’ Ka kalitukan to soini no kagi ku, sikan buwa ka igpoin-insooy now?
tonos
Ogsuguon ku sikoykow dio to mgo otow no Hudiu woy ka kono no Hudiu. Di ogpangabangan ku sikoykow ko ogkabaybayaran ka to sikan dod ian no mgo otow.
Konò og-aguanta si Joaquin no oghusoy to so-ini no problima su mabogat on lagboy.
Nigtabak si Hisus no nigkagi to, “Kono kad su ka oglobong to sika namatoy, sikandan no wa pad nigtinawo to Magboboot. Di sikoykow atag, duma ka koddi.”
sumbow
Di to tibo no mgo Hudiu no nakarinog to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon, manalingboka ro ka nigtuu. Ian natagaan ta su duon innangon ni Isaias dongan no kagi rin to Magboboot to, “A, Magboboot ku, manalingboka ro ka nigtuu to innangonnangon noy kandan.”
Ko nokouma dio to kandin, kagi ran, “Maistru, nataga koy to ognangon ka to malogot do no kono ka ogkasasow ko loin ka goinawa to mgo otow. Ogbalagaron nu ro duon ka mgo otow agad ko dakol ka katondanan dan. Og-anad ka to malogot bahin to kagi to Magboboot. Nangoni koy, tongod to Balaod ta, ko ogkaayun ko ogbayaran ta ka buhis ta dio ki Sisar no kinalabawan dan dio to Ruma? Ogbayaran tad woy kono tad on?”
Nig-inso pad ni Hisus to, “Hontow dapit kaniu ka nakatitigus to nakasalo a? Waro! Ko ogkagi a kaniu to malogot no kinagian, manio to kono kow ogtuu koddi?
Ka sikan no namu, ian igpaturuk to obol oyow ogko-obolan ka patiukan no og-awò.
Agad nokoy no magintalunan, ko dakol ka lawa ran woy ka mgo ulod-ulod no kai to tano, woy ko dio to dagat woy ka mgo manukmanuk, ogkaamuk ta rod woy duon ka nig-amuk to mgo otow to agad nokoy lunsura.
Woy waro litos no ighimu ta no igkohoy–u ta to Magboboot su waro og–awoson din. Ian su sikandin man ka nighimu to tibo, woy sikandin dod ka ogbogoy to goinawa to tibo no mgo otow woy ka mgo ayam woy ka mgo magintalunan. Woy ka agad nokoy no ogkapurut, tibo ogligkat dio to kandin.
Nigtabak si Pedro kandan, no dio mogbunsud to an–anayan no nabayaan din.
Dongan, suu ka lawa ta.
No imbogoy ni Abraham ki Milkisidik ka igkasampulu no baad to agad nokoy no noutol din to sikan no gira. Nò, daruwa ka lituk to ngaran ni Milkisidik. Ka an-anayan no lituk, Igbuyag no Matuwarong. Woy ka igkarangob, Igbuyag to Salim. No ka lituk to sikan no ngaran din, igbuyag no ogpakabogoy to maawang no goinawa.
kolid
Ogkoima, oglasinglasing. No ko oglimudlimud, ian dan og-umalagon ka igbulung to agad nokoy no igkoibog to lawa ran. Woy duon dod duma no oghimuon dan no maroot. Ogbohogon ku sikaniu kuntoon no ogkoiling dod to sikan no imbohog ku kaniu nokani to, ka sikan no otow no oghimu to sikan no mgo batasan, kono ogpokosolod to pandatuan to Magboboot.
pitow
Ka mgo nalibulung no mgo otow dio, ognaasnaasan dan do bahin kandin. Duon mgo otow no kagi ran, “Maroyow no lukos sikandin.” Di kagi to duma no mgo otow, “Kono man no maroyow sikandin su oggawayan din ka mgo otow.”
Lagkos to nohimu rod ka sikan su ligkat to kabogbogan to mgo kabolbolonganan woy to mgo pog-indan to tu-tuu ian ka nangnangonon woy su ligkat to kabogbogan to Gimukud to Magboboot. No to nokohipanow a ligkat to lunsud to Hirusalim taman to ugpaan to Iliriku, tibo ku nanangoni to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu.
Ian su ko in-anak ki, waro naalap ta, no ogkounawa rod ian ko ogkamatoy ki, songo waro ogkaalap ta.
warò
tupang
Woy duon allow no niglamposan koy, nigpirisu koy, woy ko niglinglingotan koy to mabulut no mgo otow. Nasublaan ka talabau noy, no duon allow no waro ighirogo noy woy waro ogkakoon noy.
Ogkapulusan ka agad hontow no ogbasa, woy ka ogpamminog woy ogtuman to soini no impanoy innangonnangon to kinagian to Magboboot su magaan on ogkatuman ka soini tibo.
Agad si Hisus, pogkita rin to inoy dut namatoy, nohoy-uan din sikandin. Kagi ni Hisus kandin to, “Ko kad on ogsinogow,”
Ian su kono no mgo otow no ogkounawa kanta ka og-atuan tanow. Di ian tanow og-atuan ka agad nokoy no lunsura no maroot no og-alap-alap to kabogbogan unawa ki Satanas, woy ka mgo sakup din no mgo diwata, mgo bantoy, lagkos to kohon-ingan no mgo busow no ogman-ugpo dio to aw-awangan.
Igtagad ta ka ko-onon.
Ko kulang ka langosa ta ogkatabolog ki ko oghipanow no konò ki ogpoko-orol.
Agad hontow no ogdinog to soini no mgo innangon ku no kono din ogpaagad-agad, ogkounawa sikandin to otow no malopot so pogdoromdom din no nighimu to baloy rin dio to bayokbok no pantad.
Ko ogkapolod ka sakoru, ogko-ilis ka woig di mananoy oglibuas su malig-ot ka bo-bò.
tumup
woy ko tongod kanami no mgo suguanon din ka lagboy rin ipasulat? Hoo ian, tongod kanami ka ingkasulat din. Ian su ian noy ogkounawaan ka sikan no ogdararu woy ka sikan no oggaani no litos ko ogpokoiman-iman koy to duon igkatalad kanami.
warò aporu
Ka manuk ko ogbanggutan ka darua no paa ran, ogkusubkusub oyow ogpakasabuk sikandin.
Si Taganay ka og-agud.
li-og
Nò, nakasinogow on si Hisus.
Nò, nig-umow ni Hisus ka lukos no noumil so bolad din. Kagi rin, “Sasindog ka woy hondini ka”
Nò, to kabinunsuran, ogpasabuton ku sikaniu to uromo, duon masumpalit no mgo otow no ogpokouma. No ogbobootan sikandan to mgo maroot no koibogan to mgo lawa ran. Ogsumpalitan dan sikaniu
Nò, niglibuwas to sikan no pilang ka mgo boi no nigpallaguy su noinuinu woy ogkolkol so goinawa ran. Waro dan nangoni ka agad hontow su nahallok lagboy sikandan.
li-ot
To nokogtagbu on, kagi ni Marta kuwo ki Hisus, “Buyag, ko duon kad kai porom, waro mamatoy ka maama ku.
Ka kuralun ku, no-ulug to lamisaan no nabalingotngot su nagulak on su na-awò to nigliboran.
Di kuntoon, oghimatayan a now no sikoddi ka ognangon kaniu to malogot no pigdinog ku no ogligkat to Magboboot. Di duon atag bantaan now to oghimatoy koddi. Waro moghimu si Abraham no unawa to soini!
To nakarinog, nanabukan dan ka mgo lalasangan no duon dod dohun to kalasi no kayu no ogkounawa to niug. Nanhipanow on no ogtagbu ki Hisus no layun on ogbabansagon no ogsayo to Magboboot. Nigbabansagon dan, “Ogsayoon ta ka Magboboot! Ogkapulusan ka soini no lukos no oghondini to ngaran to Magboboot. Ogkapulusan pad to Magboboot ka soini no Labow no Igbuyag to mgo taga Israil.”
tugul
Ian su agad hondoi ka ugpaan dan, ko ogtahud to Magboboot woy maroyow ka oghimuon dan, ogkohoy–uan sikandan to Magboboot.
Di tag sagboka now ka ogboot ko songo monu ka igbogoy now, su og-awoson ta to kono ki ogpakasondit ko nokoy ka igkabogoy ta su oyow kono ogkoiling to ogkapogos so goinawa ta. Ian su og-awoson to, ka igbogoy ta, dio ogligkat to maroyow no goinawa ta. No ko sikan ian, ogkarago ka Magboboot kanta.
Su ian tuud ku to duon dod goinawa ku ko ogkasayo si Kristu, di dakoldakol pad ka pulus ku ko ogkamatoy a.
pangasawa
No ka igtabak ku to sikan, sikanta no nohimu ro duon no otow, manio to ogtabakon ta ka Magboboot to sikandin man ka nighimu kanta? Pananglitan, ko duon kuron, woy ko ogpakakagi pa, kono ogkaayun no og-inso to talaghimu kandin ko manio to nig-iling din ka poghimu rin kandin.
Di dakol ka pogsalig ku to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta to kono kow ro ogpakasuwoy to sikan no in-anad ku kaniu. Di agad hontow no ogpasuwoy porom kaniu, ogkalogparan sikandin to Magboboot.
No ian su og-awoson ni Hisus to malinis ka tibo ka goinawa ta to oyow ogmaroyow ro ka pogpitow rin kanta su warad on ka agad nokoy no maroot dio to goinawa ta.
No-ugtu
gatow
barut
kalasanon
Nigtabak si Hisus ki Satanas no nigsugu to, “Satanas, awo ka kai to koddi. Duon inkasulat no kagi to Magboboot dongan to, ‘Kaniu, ian now ro simbaa ka Magboboot now woy kandin do ogpaag-agaran now.’ ”
Hondutun ka.
Warò a matagataga to tongà to uras woy a ma-alimukawi.
vMalintok ka tagù, unawa to gatas.,Ko ma-awang ka langit, ogmanipis dò ka saragapun no og-agbas dò ka layag to allow.
Nò, to masolom on, ka tibo no mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy ka mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu nigbantaan dan bahin ki Hisus ko nokoy ka oghimuon dan oyow ogpohimatayan dan.
Du-on otow no nabunù no nakabatas to dalan ka lawa rin to nokohibat ka namatoy on.
Moon-ing ka alik-ik diò to kanami no mabatok di konò ogkagamit to igbaakì to agoloy. Ian dò ogkagamit ka alik-ik no mo-ilow.
Ko rio woy si Hisus to sikan no ugpaan, nokouma ka duma no mgo Parisiu rio ki Hisus woy nigbunsud nigmaap-apuloy kandin. Nò, nigbuyu dan no oghimuon ni Hisus ka igkoinuinuan oyow og-ol-ologan dan porom sikandin ko malogot ian to duon kabogbogan din puun to Magboboot.
Di mangkuan, nigtalis no warò nigliwan.
Ian su ogkohoy-uan ku sikandan no makasasalo woy kono kud on ogdoromdomon ka maroot no nohimu ran,’ kagi to Magboboot.”
pilikpilik
Ko ogtotomog ka to hapuy no oghiupan nu, ogko-obolan ka mata nu no ogmaporos on.
Balagara now ka mgo Parisiu. Ogkounawa sikandan to otow no nabutud. Nò, og-insa a kaniu ko litos ko ogpakitkitooy ka noolin no nabutud? Kono su sikandan no darua, ogkoulug dio to kanal.”
ting-al
pinya
Tag sagboka kaniu, ko duon talinga now, og-awoson to ogpamminog kow to soini:
sapò
Di nig–uyag on to Magboboot si Hisus ligkat to kamatayon din.
Og-awoson to layun ki ogpoobos woy ogmolungangon ki. No ligkat to ogmarakdakoloy ki to goinawa, ogmalayaton ta ka goinawa ta to duma ta.
bokad
Ko du-on oghimuon ta di ko du-on igkasasow ta, na-akoban ka oghimuon ta porom no an-anayan no na-aloy ki diò to dangob no warò ta nato-ori.
budbud
Nigkagian man do ni Hisus sikandan to, “Nahan now no mapandoy kow to pog-iniug to Balaod to Magboboot oyow ka batasan to kabuybuyagan now ka ogkounug kow. Ka ku kow, nò!
no ian kapunganan dongan to mgo Hudiu. Duon malogot no intaga rin oyow ogpohitaga rin ki Abraham to kandin ka nigkagi oyow ogtuuan ni Abraham.
Di ko duon si Hisu Kristu to goinawa ta, agad ogkamatoy ka lawa ta no ogligkat to nokani no duon ki pad to salo, di duon on kouyagan ta no kono ogkaawo su ligkat to nohimu kinow on no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.
itan
Og-inso a ko duon pa ka agad sagboka ro no sobsob no dio ogligkat ka maroyow no woig lagkos to mapoit? Waro man ian.
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to, “Duon mgo otow uromo no ogpokog-amut ko ogkoon dio to Pandatuan to Magboboot. Kandan, dio ogpuun to mgo mariu no mgo ugpaanan to mgo otow no konon Hudiu no dio to longod to ogsilaan to allow, woy ka dio to balabagan woy ka dio to ogsalopan to allow woy ka dio to habagatan.
ampu
Igsorop on kat bu-aya to tambaò.
tamuk
dasok
Ko ogdaliwasoon ka, konò ka ogkohirogò. Ungod ka ogbalbalikid ka oghibat no ungod ka oglimusongan taman to ogkapawa-an ka.
Nigkagi si Hisus to pananglitan din kuwo to mgo hibatoon din, “Koddi ka malogot no lawa to bunal to ubas woy ka Amoy ku ka Talag-uyamu.
Songo ogpapangumustaan ku ka mgo otow no oglimudlimud no og-ampu dio to kandan no baloy. Ogpapangumusta a ki Ipinitu no indakoli ku to goinawa. Sikandin ka an-anayan no otow no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu dio to probinsia to Asia.
banug
lambitan
pugad
katondanan
Di kagi ran, “Maroyow ko kono igdongan to Pagkoonan to Paligad su ogkasamuk ka mgo otow.”
Nakagagow ad to ko-onon.
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to, “Og-awoson now to ogpanagana kow to agad nokoy ka ogdatong kaniu. Hogota now ka holon to kinabo now woy parokot kow to ilawan now. Unawaa now, pananglitan, to mgo suguonon no ogtatagad to kon-u buwa ogpokouma on ka igbuyag dan no ogpuun to sagboka no pagkoonan to ogpangasawa. Ko ogpokouma on ka igbuyag dan no og-umow, magaan dan do ogkapulasi ka gumawan.
Mohon-ing ka mgo otow no nakatitigus di ogman-uubat do duon. Waro litos no igbayung dan. Nò, nalugoy on ka pog-in-insooy ran woy duon darua no otow no nigsasindog
Ko du-on otow no og-utang di ogkasipod no ognangon, di songo otow on ka ognangonan din. Ogkagi to sikan no otow to, “Du-on ig-alukuy din koykow.”
songot
di si Hisus, dio nigbayo to taliwaro to sikan no mohon-ing no mgo otow no nigpamariu on sikandin.
Nò, su ian ka ogkoiniatan to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus, og-awoson ta to ogpaagad-agad kinow to mgo balaod to mgo otow no duon katondanan dio to mgo ugpaan ta unawa to punuan no igbuyag ta,
hogukhoguk
lingkut
tu-us
Ko oggotas ki, oghondiò ki to koilawan no ogtamporan ta ka lawa to balagon no ogpuruton tad on.
Nò, pogkataga ni Hirodis no nagawayan sikandin to mgo otow no mamimituon, nabolu lagboy sikandin. Tongod to soini, nigsugu sikandin no oghimatayan ka tibo no mgo lukos no bato taman to darua no tuid dan dio to lunsud to Bitlihim woy mgo lunsud no marani. Pighimu ni Hirodis soini oyow ogpakatood no ogkohimatayan si Hisus, su darua on ka tuid ligkat to pogkakita to mgo otow no mamimituon to sika bituon.
Kagi ran kaniu to, “Ko ogdatong on ka mohuri no allow, duon mgo otow dio to kaniu no ogsumsumpalit kaniu woy ogtumanon dan ka kandan do no ogkoiniatan.” Sikan ka innangon dan.
Nò duon mabantug no mgo pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu no nig-amut kandan no si Santiago, si Pedro, woy si Huan. Nò, nigtokod sikandan to nigbogayan ad to Magboboot to katondanan ku, no nigpangumusta sikandan kanami woy ki Birnabi ka nig-uyun to dio koy ognangonnangon to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. No sikandan ka ognangonnangon to mgo Hudiu.
Nò, nohoy-uan sikandin to datu. Nigpasaylu din ka suguanon din woy nigbalagad din ka utang; warad on pabayari woy impouli on sikandin dio to baloy din.
Ko du-on oghimuon no oglalaron noy, tagsongo punduk, [o] suun.
Ko ogpasayluan now ka salo to mgo otow, ogkapasaylu ro. Di ko kono now ogpasayluon ka salo to songo otow, songo kono ogpasayluon.
Ian to nighondio koy su sikan ka impohitaga to Magboboot kanak no goinawa rin. No to pogkouma noy, nig-al-alukuy ad to mgo pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu. Di nigmatongtongopoy koy ro ka olin no mgo igbuyag. No innangonnangon kud on kandan ka tibo to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon no ig-anad ku to sikan no mgo otow no kono no Hudiu su ian goinawa ku to, ka talabau ku nokani woy ka kuntoon, kono ogkaraat.
ongkod
“Kono now doromdoma no ian ku ighondini to kalibutan to og-awo to samuk. Wara a nighondini to og-awo to samuk di nighondini ad oyow ogpokog-usig ka mgo otow.
Ka tibo no mgo nigtuu kai, ogpapangumusta kaniu.
pangolibot
woy to kono dan ogpamurut to mgo kalaglagan to sikan no nig-uyamu kandan. Di og-awoson atag to ogpakitoon dan to maroyow ro tibo ka mgo batasan dan woy to tu-tuu ian no ogkasaligan sikandan oyow ligkat to tibo no oghimuon dan, ogkabantugan ka mgo otow to soini no ig-anad ta tongod to Magboboot no nigpangabang kanta.
tungkilit
No ka soini no sulat igpaalap noy kaniu no sampangan to mgo otow no ogtuu kandin no og-ugpo dio to lunsud to Kurintu. Sikaniu, nig-indanan kow on to Magboboot su ligkat to nasagboka kow on ki Hisu Kristu. No to pog-abin din kaniu, nakalagkos kow on to tibo no mgo otow dio to agad hondoi no ogsampit to ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag to tibo no mgo otow no og-ampu kandin.
Di pighutuk nighinggata to sikan no igbuyag. Kagi rin, “Buyag, agpas ka. Ogduruma ki pad ian to kono pad ogkamatoy ka anak ku.”
Ian su to goinawa noy, noiling to nabobootan koy on to kamatayon noy. Di ian to nohimu ka sikan su oyow ogkaanad koy to oyow kono koy ogsalig to kanami ro no doromdom, di og-awoson to ian noy ro ogsaligan ka Magboboot no ian ogpokouyag to mgo nammatoy.
Di ko ogkoon ka to ngalap no naan to duma nu no kono no litos no igpakoon, ogmasakit on ka goinawa rin no ogkounawa to ogdoisok ka goinawa nu kandin. Sikan ian to og-awoson no og-ayad-ayad ki to oyow, ka ogkoonon ta, kono ogkohimu no ian ogligkatan to pogkaraat to pogtuu to duma ta su ka pogpakimatoy ni Hisu Kristu, songo niglitos kandin.
Nigbalabag to innangon to songo otow.
Nò, kagi pa ni Hisus kuwo kandan. “Koddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan, ig-ampow a now dio to krus no oglindogon now ka sikan no krus. Bali pad naan, ogkataga kow on to koddi ka nigtagaran now no Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan. Songo ogkataga kow on to kono ogligkat to koddi no bobootan ka agad nokoy no oghimuon ku di ka ignangon ku kaniu ka ig-anad koddi to Amoy ku.
Di waro makakagi ka sikan no mgo pogbuyagon su nakitaan dan on man ka sikan no otow no noulian on no duon mogsasindog to tangkaan dan.
da-ilan
Nigkagi si Tirino, “Ka konò ogka-agkapan, konò og-awò kai to Kapugi. Ko ogka-agkapan, ogkohonat kow kunto-on diò to Maambago su ngilaman pad to mangayow.”
Soini ka pogbuyu din su nigkagian on ni Hisus ka busow no kagi rin, “Koykow no busow no nigsolod to soin no otow, libuwas kad to soin no otow.”
lirù
“Ka mgo duma ku, nigkita to layag di waro mogdinog to kagi to sikan no nignangon kanak.
Ko du-on og-insò, “Nokoy aldowa asolom?” Ian ig-insò su warò mataga ko nokoy ka asolom ko Lunis woy ko Mierkulis bua.
Poglibong woy ni Hisus dio to doipag to sikan no lanow, nakatagbu sikandan to mohon-ing no mgo otow su tibo sikandan, ogtatagad to poglibong din.
Ko du-on ka niglanowlanow no woig no konò ogko-oti-an, sikan ka bala-as su warò pad aligbat makamoti.
momos
inatawan
Ian su sagboka ro ka Magboboot woy songo sagboka ro ka talaghusoy no si Hisu Kristu no ian tigpataliwaro to Magboboot woy to mgo otow,
lison
Kandin no baloy.
Nigpakpakan bag ka so-ini no piak.
agad malogot no nigkagi rin to kono ogtahuron ka talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dio to kandin no lunsud.
tubug
panganup
ngarog
Woy og-ampu koy to oyow, ligkat kaniu, ogkasayo ka ngaran ni Hisus no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, woy to oyow songo ogkasayo kow rin. No ka sikan, ogligkat to pogkohoy-u to Magboboot no ian Magboboot tanow, woy ligkat dod ki Hisu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
mintod
balos
Ogdalonò ka mgo otow no ogtutukbung to oghirogo-an to sagboka rò no mausilom.
otus
ubut
loblob
Sikan ian to impatagu din on si Pablo daruwa ki Silas diad on to sungguk on ian, woy nigsuulan din on ka paa ran to mgo igbandog no kayu.
tabak
Ka sikan no ig-agpas, igdagusu nu ka otow oyow maga-an kaponga.
Malogot ka ignangon ku kaniu to sikan no suguanon no ogkasaligan to igbuyag din, ogbogayan sikandin to ogboot to tibo no mgo karatuan to igbuyag dan.
Nò, nigsolod si Hisus dio to Dakol no Ampuanan woy nigdogil din ka tibo no mgo otow no ogpamoligya woy ogpamboli dio to gumawan to Ampuanan. Songo nigbalintuad din ka mgo lamisaan to mgo otow no talagsaliu to salapi, woy songo nigbalintuad din ka mgo pinnuuanan to mgo talagbaligya to salapati. Tibo din on ian pigbalintuad.
Kono no ignangon ku to waro tumana to Magboboot ka innangon din kandan. Di ian ku ignangon to duon mgo pinanganak ni Israil no kono no tu-tuu no sakup to Magboboot.
galat
nging
Kagi ran to, “Ka mgo otow no nighun–a kanta kai to kalibutan, nanhimu ran to agad nokoy no batasan no ogkaroromdom dan, no waro pad dongan sapari to Magboboot sikandan.
himonu
No pogkaponga, nigbatun si Hisus dio to Langit no duon on sikandin to kawanan to Magboboot. Si Hisus ka ogpakaboot to tibo no diwata to Magboboot woy to mgo tagalangit no og-alap-alap to katondanan lagkos to sikan no og-alap to dakol no kabogbogan dan.
lawo-lawò
Di to sikan no mgo otow no nakarinog to kinagian to Magboboot, mohon–ing ka nigtuu on ki Hisus. No ko nasool pa ka mgo lukos do, duon buwa lalimma no malan ka nigtuu.
Woy ka Maroyow no Nangnangonon bahin to Pogsugu to Magboboot, ogpakalogob to kalibutan. Ko ogkatuman on soini, sikan ian ka katamanan to soin no kalibutan.”
Nigkagian ni Hisus ka mgo otow to, “Og-insa a ko waro kow makabasa to impasulat to Magboboot? Soini ka kagi to impasulat din: ‘Ka batu no nig-ongkoran to mgo talaghimu to baloy su nahan dan no waro pulus to sikan no batu, sikan ka nohimu nasi no marigon lagboy no batu no igpounturan to baloy. Ka Magboboot ka nigboot to sikan no batu no nahan dan no waro pulus. Nabolongbolong ki to soini.’
Bali ku tilawa ka bogyas ku no naponù to po-it ka nigsagad to bogyas.
panamay
lupad
hiup
No to poghondio ku to Hirusalim, ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu woy ka mgo pogbuyagon dan, nighondio to kanak woy innangonnangon dan kanak ka ingkabolu dan ki Pablo woy nigbuyu dan oyow ogpalogparan kud on porom sikandin.
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to mgo hibatoon ni Huan to, “Napulusan ka otow no kono no limanglimang ka goinawa ran to sikoddi ka impohondini to Magboboot.”
No su wa dan moiniati ka tu-tuu no katagaanan dan poron to Magboboot, waro din on sagmana sikandan. No ligkat to sikan, natimtimulan do ian ka mgo maroot no doromdom dan no nighimu ran on ka kono no litos.
No, ogpamukal ka mohon-ing no mgo babuy dio to masandig no kono no amana no mariu.
otow
nokal
dantoy
No nignangonan a to kagi rin to, “Og-awoson to ighutuk nu ignangonnangon ipanoy ka kinagian to Magboboot tongod ko nokoy ka ogkoumaan uromo dio to agad hondoi no mgo otow no dio to agad hondoi no mgo ugpaan woy dio to ogkaloinloin no mgo kinagian dan. Woy songo igkanangonnangon nu dio to mgo igbuyag dan.”
su tibo kow, mgo anak to kaawangan no og-ugpo kid to kaallawan no kono kid on to karusiloman woy ko doloman.
Ampu kow dio to Magboboot to kono kow poron ogpakasalsalia ko longdong woy ko Allow to Oghimoloy,
Nò, sikaniu no mgo duma ku no mgo Hudiu, ogsalig kow buwa to nahan now to litos on ka pogtuman now to Balaod ni Moisis. Woy ogparakoldakol kow su nahan now no sikaniu ro ka duon labot to Magboboot.
liput
Sikan ka kagi rin kandan no nig-ugpo pad sikandin dio to Galilia no waro mogduma kandan.
ludlud
bulbulon
dagup
Nò, duon boi no nigdani dio to kandin no duon nig-alap din no taguanan no nohimu to kalasi no batu no oghingaranan to alabastro. Naponu ka taguanan to ogkounawa to lana no mohomut woy lagboy no mahal. Nò, imbus-ug to boi ka tibo dio to ulu ni Hisus tagood no nigkokoon pad si Hisus.
Ka bungkal, songsong to tagan to apug. Balagon ka inhimu no ian ag-agan to apug.
solag
Ko oglogsad ka ariplanu diò to Maambago, moon-ing ka mgo otow no ogma-anma-an ko hontow ka inlonò no magaliug.
tapilak
dopa
Ka otow no nabolù, nigbokas ka nigkagi; nigparagas nigkagi. Nigma-agbot to nigkagi su ogkatokow ki.
Ligkat to sikan, ogpakasabut kid on to waro nakasolod sikandan to sikan no himolayan to Magboboot su waro nigtuu sikandan to kagi to Magboboot.
pila
Kaniu pad og-unoy-unoy
Di pogdinog to mohon-ing no mgo otow to nighipanow woy si Hisus, nanundul kandan dio to Bitsaida. Nigtinawo ni Hisus ka mgo otow no nignangnangonan din sikandan bahin to Pogsugu to Magboboot woy nigbawian din ka mgo otow no nigdaralu.
kalon
Nigtangko si Hisus to mgo hibatoon din no nigkagian din sikandan do. Kagi ni Hisus to, “Ogkapulusan kow su nakakita kow to mgo hinimuan ku.
baloybaloy
pala-os
kow
Nò, pogdinog ni Birnabi woy ki Pablo to tuud to mgo otow, niggisi dan on ka sabinit dan no igmaganangon to ogmasakit so goinawa ran. No nigtalanak dio to taliwaro to sikan no mohon–ing no mgo otow no nigbabansagon to nigkagi to,
No, natokow no nigdani si Hisus kandan. Kagi rin to, “Hondoi kow?” Nigdanian dan si Hisus woy niggongonan dan ka paa rin no nigsayo dan sikandin.
Agad hontow no og-ongkod to soini no in-anad tongod ki Kristu no ogbalbalawon din on oyow konad on no tu-tuu, waro dio to kandin ka Magboboot. Di ka otow no ogparagason to pogtuu rin ka sikan no in-anad, nakagongon to Magboboot no Amoy woy ki Hisu Kristu no ian Anak din.
sinarab
Ma-agbot ka alimbual.
barut
Di duon kai to kaniu no waro nigtuu.” Sikan ka kagi su nataga on tahan si Hisus ko hontow kandan ka kono ogtuu. Songo nataga ko hondoi no hibatoon din ka ogtabod pad kandin.
To nigpitow si Hisus kandin no masakit so goinawa rin kagi ni Hisus to, “Mohirap ian to datu no mgo otow to ogpasakup to Pogsugu to Magboboot.
Agad pad so duon ka sikan no igkoirapi, nasi no igkarago now, woy sayowsayow kow to dakol ian ka igdasag kaniu no noindanan kaniu dio to Langit su ka oghimuon to mgo otow kaniu. Songo unawa ka batasan to kandan no mgo apu to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot.”
lino-ubud
Ko du-on diò to songo barrio on ka ogka-alap, inat to mgo sakup din tibò.
Mabogbog ka Maambago su ogkabantugan su maroyow ka mgo otow.
Ko oglaba ki to manggad, agad warò amana allow igkarampil ta rod su ogkagangu rod ko ogkakalamagan.
Di ka og-awoson tanow no oghimuon, ungod kinow ogpaagad-agad to ingkaanad kanta.
ko hondoi mogpuun ka katondanan ni Huan to ogbautismuan din ka mgo otow dio to woig, ko rio to Magboboot no og-ugpo dio to Langit, woy ko nigpuun do dini to mgo otow ka katondanan din?”
kapungan
ku
lambag
“Duon ogkarinog tanow no mamatalo dio to lunsud to Rama. Ogkarinog tanow ka ogsisinogow woy ogpandalawit su si Rakil masakit lagboy so goinawa rin to mgo anak din. Ungod sikandin ogsinogow woy kono ogkoim-imuan ka goinawa rin su nammatoy ka mgo anak din.”
langkob
“Maistru, nignangon si Moisis dongan no ko ogkamatoy ka songo lukos no waro anak dan, ka hari rin ka og-asawa dut sikan no boi oyow duon porom anak to kakoy rin.
Pogkaponga ran on to sikan no poglimud dan, mohon–ing ka mgo Hudiu woy ka kono no Hudiu no ogtahud to Magboboot no nokani nighalin to tinuuan to mgo Hudiu, no nanduma ki Pablo woy ki Birnabi. No duon innangonnangon woy si Pablo kandan woy nig–os–osonan dan to oyow kono dan ogloko to dakol no pogkohoy–u to Magboboot kandan.
sapipi
kalad
Ian su oyow ogkatul-id on ka doromdom dan no ogkaawo on to pogboot ni Satanas no nakagawoy kandan su tuud din poron ko ogkapogos din poron sikandan to oghimu to ogkoiniatan din.
Ko dio to Dakol no Ampuanan, marani nigpinnuu ni Hisus to taguanan to salapi no ogbabantayan din ka mgo otow no ogtagu to igbogoy no salapi dan to taguanan. Mohon-ing ka datu no dakol ka in-ulug dan.
opuk
toros
binuga-an
malayat ka ogkasabukan to goinawa
To nokouma sikandan to marani to mgo lunsud to Bitpahi woy ka Bitania duon to malopot no bubungan no oghingaranan dan to Olibu, nigsugu si Hisus to darua no hibatoon din to oghun-a kandin.
Woy ko ian now ro ogbuligan ka otow no songo ogbulig kaniu, manio to ogsayoon kow pad to Magboboot? Kono kow ogsayoon su ka mgo makasasalo, songo ogbulig dod to otow no songo ogbulig kandan,” kagi ni Hisus.
daliwasoon
Ko katangkob on ka karusiloman to Allow ran to Oghimoloy nigboli ni Maria no taga Magdala, si Salomi woy si Maria no inoy ni Santiago, ka mgo mohomut no lana no litos to igbus-ug to lawa ni Hisus.
ganat
Ian su si Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, nigpohitaga kanak to malopot naan doka pog-ugpo ku kai to ampow to soini no tano.
Nigtabak ka igbuyag dan to, ‘Kono now pa bagnusa kuntoon su ogpakalagkos now buwa ka duma no pinamula,’ kagi to igbuyag dan.
Sompoka’n to tirò.
Ka mgo dalaga atag no duon maroyow woy malayat so pogdoromdom dan, nig-alap dan pad ka mgo taguanan to lana no litos ko ogkoubus on ka duon to ilawan dan.
Hisugata nu to’gpanò
Sikan ian to nabolu ad on ian no nigsapaan ku to konad on ogpokosolod ka sikan no mgo otow dio to intagad ku poron kandan no himolayan.” Sikan ka innangon to Magboboot.
Si Kaipas ian ka nigtambag to mgo Hudiu to litos ko sagboka ro no otow ka ogkamatoy to salo to tibo no otow.
Kagi to mgo otow ki Hisus to, “Dio to libuwasan ka inoy nu woy ka mgo hari nu. Pohondion ka kun.”
tulin
Nokouma on si Hisus mgo hibatoon din dio to lunsud to Kapirnaum. Ko Allow to mgo taga Hudia to Oghimoloy, nigsolod sikandan to anaranan to mgo og-ampu no nig-anad ni Hisus ka mgo otow dio.
Ko oggutasan ka otow, konò ogpoko-orol to ogtalabao. Warò dayagang dan.
tu-un
Songo og-ugpo kai ka mgo ataboy din. Hondoi buwa nigpuun ka kabogbogan din to oghimu to mgo koin-inuan no unawa to soini?” kagi to mgo otow.
alam
no
tibungul
Sikan ian to Og-awoson ta to Ogdakolon ta ka pogsagman to sikan no tu-tuu ian no nigdinog ta oyow kono ki ogpakasuwoy to sikan ian no ingkaanad kanta.
Ko ogmiting ka mgo otow, ko ogkaponga ka miting dan, ogtibuas on ka ogman-ulì.
digus
Ogkukutkut ka asu su og-abalangon din ka ambow diò to lungag to tanò.
kabil
kamansal
Nò,” kagi ni Pablo, “Manio to mohirap kaniu to ogtuu to duon allow uromo no ogkouyag to Magboboot ka mgo nammatoy?
tibitibi
Awoson ta to ogpo-omot ki to talabau no unawa to uripon. Konò ki ogsuloysuloy to pogtalabau ta.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Sikoddi ka sika igkouyag no paan no ogligkat dio to langit. Ko ogkoonon now ka soin no paan, kono kad on ogkamatoy. Ka igbogoy ku no paan, sikan ka koddi no lawa oyow ogkootawan ka mgo koot-otawan no waro katamanan.” Ian ka kagi ni Hisus.
Nò, kagi ni Hisus to mgo hibatoon din to, “Nokani ko nigsugu a kaniu to oghipanow dio to dalan, innangon ku kaniu to kono kow og-alap to pitaka, woy ko kabil woy ko sapatus. No kuntoon, og-inso a kaniu ko nakulangan kow to agad nokoy?” Kagi to mgo hibatoon din, “Waro koy ian makulangi.”
Dokow ogpamurut; kasagda ki
silit
Sonditi nud on ka soini no maroot lagboy no tuud nu woy ampui nu ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus oyow, ko ogkohimu, ogpasayluan din on ka salo nu no ogligkat to soini no maroot no duon to goinawa nu.
gotgot
Warò a matagataga to tongà to uras woy a ma-alimukawi.
Di si Saulo no songo oghingaranan ki Pablo, niglonaan on to Gimukud to Magboboot. No nigtotongtongan ni Pablo si Ilimas.
Duon duma no hibatoon no nahan dan no pigsugu ni Hisus sikandin to ogboli to og-awoson dan no litos to sika Pagkoonan. Songo duon goinawa ran ko nigsugu din buwa to ogbogayan din ka mgo publi to salapi. Sikan ka goinawa ran su si Hudas ian ka talagtalipun to salapi dan.
solod
No, nokouma on ka allow no ogbunsud on ka Pagkoonan no oghingaranan to Paan no Waro Amuti to Igpatulin. Sikan ka allow no oghimatayan dan ka nati to karniru no ogkoonon dan to sika pagkoonan no nighingaranan dan to Paligad.
No kuntoon, og-awoson to ogpasayluon now on sikandin woy ogbuligan now on ka goinawa rin oyow kono ogkalonod sikandin to subla no masakit to goinawa rin.
Maroyow ran ian ka igtahud to mgo otow dio to palingki woy ogkarago lagboy sikandan ko og-umawon sikandan to ‘Maistru.’
Mgo anak, ogsulatan ku sikaniu su ogdurumaruma kow to Amoy ta no dio to Langit. Ogsulatan ku sikaniu, mgo amoy, su ogdurumaruma kow ki Hisus no duon tahan no waro pad nohimu ka soini no kalibutan. Ogsulatan ku sikaniu no mgo lukos no kono pad amana no buyag su manokal ka pogtuu now woy su og-ugpo ka kinagian to Magboboot dio to taliwaro to goinawa now no naroog now si Satanas.
Woy nigkita kow to nigpoobos a to ogpaagad–agad a to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. Nataga kow rod to malasi a makasinogow tongod to mgo igkabaybayari ku no nigligkat to mgo Hudiu no waro nigtuu no nigbayadbayad kanak.
Ka alang to mgo pinamula, warò nigligkat to igtubad.
naan
Katigbas ki
pamalù
Kagi pa ni Hisus, “Kona a ogboboot to mgo otow to koddi no goinawa. Ogpamminog a ro to kagi to Magboboot ko nokoy ka ignangon din koddi. Woy maroyow ka koddi no igboot su kono no koddi no bobootan ka oghimuon ku. Ka tuud ku ian ka pogboot to sikan nigsugu koddi no Magboboot.
Songo waro otow no ogparokot to ilawan no ogsalukuban din to lata. Di igsabuk din atag dio to unturanan no ogkalayagan ka tibo no ogsolod to baloy.
Nò, ko napongaan sikan, kono ogkalugoy no ogkakitaan a no Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan no ogpoko-untud a to mgo gapun no dakol lagboy ka kabogbogan ku woy ogkitoon ka karayawi ku.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Nokoy pad ka duma no igpananglitan ku no ogpounawaan to Pogsugu to Magboboot?
undongul
No, kagi ni Gamaliel to mgo duma rin to, “Mgo duma ku no pinanganak ni Israil, ayad-ayad kow ko ogmomuon now ka soini no mgo otow.
Songo nigtugunan si Hisus mgo hibatoon din dio to kasalan no nig-amut dan on.
Panuntukon kud sikaniu.
Soini ka igsulat ku kaniu tongod ki Hisu Kristu no ian ogngaranan to Kinagian. Duon tahan si Hisus no waro pad nohimu ka soini no kalibutan. Di sikanami no mgo suguanon din, nigdinog koy to kagi rin woy namolmologan noy on ian to pogpitow noy kandin, woy songo nakagongon koy to lawa rin. Si Hisus ka ogpohitaga kanta to pogkouyag no nigligkat to Magboboot,
Di ka mgo igbuyag kai to kalibutan, waro dan matagoi ka pighimu to Magboboot. Ian su ko natagaan dan pa, waro dan porom pohimatayi dio to krus ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no niglabow to tibo.
lambù
no kagi rin to, “Ko ogkataga kow pa poron ka og-awoson now to oyow ogkabogayan kow on to maroyow no pog-ugpo, di kuntoon, noholosan kow to dalan now dio to maroyow no pog-ugpo now.
langosa
gandul
No si Satanas no niggawoy kandan, igdogpak sikandin dio to ogliabliab no hapuy to asupri no nigdogpakan to sikan no magintalunan no nigligkat to dagat woy ka talagnangon to kinagian din. No to allow woy to marusilom taman to waro katamanan ka igkabaybayari ran.
tibogow
Nò, nigpoin-insooy ka duma no mgo hibatoon ni Hisus to “Nokoy buwa ka lituk to kagi rin no nignangon din to kono ogkalugoy no kona a now ogkitoon. Woy songo kono ogkalugoy no ogkitoon a now man do. Agad duon kagi rin to ‘Oghondio ad to Amoy ku.’
tagbanua
To pogko-ulug, a las sinku to maapun.
amung
Ko ogtingkik ki to bangan no batu, oglagsik ka baga.
karigarol
tolab
No pogpitow ku no ka 144,000 no mgo otow, namansasindog dio to tangkaan to sikan no pinnuuanan to pandatuan to Lagboy no Igbuyag woy to longod to sikan no hop-at no hinimu no duon goinawa woy ka mgo pogbuyagon. No ka sikan no 144,000 no mgo otow, nigman-opad to iam no opparon. Sikandan doka nataga to sikan no opparon su sikandan ka nigligkat to kalibutan no nabalukas on to langosa ni Hisus no oghingaranan to Nati no Karniru.
su og-awoson ku to oyow ogkoima ka mgo karumaan ku no mgo Hudiu. No ligkat to sikan, ogkohimu to duon duma no mgo Hudiu no ogtuu on ki Hisus no ogkapangabangan on to mgo salo dan.
Nò, nigpaap-apuloy pad ka mgo buyag no kagi ran to, “Ko ogtabak kinow to nigpuun to Magboboot, songo og-insaan ki ni Hisus to, ‘Manio to waro kow mogtuu to nangnangonon din?’
Ka sikan no alunggun, sikan ka iam no nig-asawa di warò pad anak.
“Duon pad boni no nakasawod to maroyow no tano. Nigtubu woy nigtuga. Ka songo tagdoy nokouma to songo gatus ka bogas din. To niggaani ran on, dakol ka natibug to nagaani ran.” Nigtimul si Hisus no ogkagi to, “Omunaan ko duon talinga now pamminog kow.”
to nohimu a rin no suguanon ni Hisu Kristu oyow ogpakanangonnangon a kaniu no kono no Hudiu to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod kandin. Ogkounawa a to talagpanubad, no sikaniu no kono no Hudiu no nigtuu ki Hisus ka igbogoy ku dio to Magboboot. No og-awoson to ligkat to oghimuon to Gimukud to Magboboot, warad agad nokoy no maroot dio to goinawa now. Sikan ka litos to Magboboot.
Ko naponga on, nanhondio si Hisus, ka inoy rin, mgo hari rin woy ka mgo hibatoon din to lunsud to Kapirnaum no pila ro no allow ran dio.
Nò ka kuntoon no pogdani ta to Magboboot, kono no ogkounawa to pogdani to mgo pinanganak ni Israil dongan. Sikandan, nigdani to sikan no bubungan no oghingaranan to Sinai no ogkasamsam dan poron. No duon nigkita ran no niglogdog no hapuy. Woy nigdagap ka marusilom to maallow pad, woy duon niggoram dan no maagbot lagboy no kalamag.
Di,” kagi ni Hisus, “ko ogbuyu a to pogbulig dio to kandin, kono ogkatuman ka impasulat to kagi rin dongan to og-awoson no ogpakatood ka igkoirapi ku,” kagi rin.
Ian ian su dio to tangkaan to Magboboot no Amoy ta, ka tu-tuu ian no pog-unug ta to goinawa rin no waro maroot no igkaamut, ko ogtantanuran ta ka goinawa ta to oyow kono ki ogkaayat to mgo maroot no batasan to mgo waro nigtuu no kai to soini no kalibutan su oyow kono ki ogkabuingan ka pogkootow ta. Woy og-awoson ta to ogsagmanon ta ka mgo noilu woy ka nabalu no mgo boi to mgo igkohirapi ran.
Nahan ni Moisis ko ogpakasabut buwa ka mgo duma rin no pinanganak ni Israil to nigtuud ka Magboboot to sikandin ka ogpangabang kandan no ogkabaybayaran. Di waro dan masabuti.
Kagi atag to duma no mgo otow to si Elias buwa no dongan no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no nig-uli. No kagi to duma no mgo otow man do, to nootawan buwa ka songo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no ogkounawa to mgo talagnangon to kabubuyagan ta dongan.
Di loin ian ka kaniu no ig-anad. Ka kaniu no ig-anad ian ko ignangon to songo otow to amoy rin woy ko inoy rin to, ‘Kona ad on ogpakapangabang kaniu su ka igbulig ku kaniu porom, kono ku ogkabogoy su korban on ian.’ To kaniu no batasan konad litos to ogbulig ka sikan no otow to amoy rin woy ko inoy rin su ka lituk to korban, ian ka igtubad dio to Magboboot do.
Ko nokouma on, nig-inso ni Pilatu ki Hisus to, “Koykow ka Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu?” Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Malogot ka kagi nu.”
gastu
Kagi ni Hisus, “Sikoddi no og-alkuy koykow, sikoddi ian ka sikan no Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan.
landog
No nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Nò man. Ibogoy now dio ki Sisar ka kandin no bahin woy ibogoy now rio to Magboboot ka kandin no bahin.”
Igsondad ki to bayadbayad.
woy narago a lagboy to Magboboot no ian Talagpangabang to koddi no salo
Ka tibo no mgo taga Hirusalim, nakarinog on to noomonu si Hudas. Sikan ian no ka tano no naboli to salapi din, nighingaranan on to Akildama. Ian lituk to kinagian dan, Tano no Nalangosaan.
ikul
Kagi rin kandan no tatolu to, “Sasakiti so goinawa ku no amana to igkamatoy ku. Kai kow pa woy bantoy kow.”
kono kow ogpagkol to goinawa now no ogkounawa to nohimu to mgo otow dongan no nakabayo to holholawan no nanligal to innangon din woy ungoron dan og-ol-ologi ka Magboboot no nigbayo sikandan to sikan no awayan no mammara no tano.
Nig-inso ka mgo Parisiu to mgo talagbantoy, “Sikaniu, songo nagawayan kow on buwa?
kali-a-an
Ka tagan, ligkat to bulu no tagu-anan to apug.
logò
Ka manuk no kumalasanon, niglo-ow no nigbaluy no kalasangon.
Naligtung no woig.
pila
Nigtugun a kandin
Ko nakaponga nigkagi ka Magboboot, nig-agpas niglingi-lingi ka sika tatolu no hibatoon di si Hisus naan do ka pigkita ran; warad on ka sikan so darua.
Kono no maroyow ka igparakoldakol now. Nataga kow to pananglitan no ogkagi to, agad malintok do ka ig-amut no igpatulin to paan, ogtulin ka tibo.
Nò,” kagi ni Hisus, “Bantoy kow.” “Ko ogpakasalo ka duma now, sapari now. Ko ogsondit to salo din, pasaylua now sikandin
Ian su nokani, sikanta no mgo otow, kono ogkohimu ko kono ki ogpakasalo. No ligkat to sikan, ogkamatoy kinow. Di kuntoon, ligkat to nohimu kinow on no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, dakoldakol ka pogkohoy-u rin kanta no ogbogayan ki to kouyagan no waro katamanan no ogligkat ki Hisu Kristu no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
Konad ogsagman to ogko-on. Woig na-an dò ka og-inumon din.
Agad kono ki ogkasaligan no ogtuman to kinagian to Magboboot, di ogkasaligan atag sikandin no ogtuman to kinagian din su kono ogkohimu ko kono din ogtumanon ka innangon din.
Si Timoteo no duma ku to ognangonnangon to kinagian to Magboboot, ogpapangumusta kaniu. Songo ogpapangumustaan kow ni Lusiu, woy si Hasun, woy si Susipatru no mgo sulod ku.
Ogmo-omot ka tibò.
Duon narinog no kagi ligkat dio to langit no nigkagi to, “Soini ka koddi no anak no indakoli to goinawa ku. Dakol ka igkarago ku kandin.”
Ogpamitawon a now, di kona a now on ogkitoon su kono kow man ogpakasundul dio to ogdatongan ku.”
Kagi pa ni Hisus, “Nignangonan kud sikaniu to ogkamatoy kow ro duon no waro maawo ka salo now. Nò, malogot soini ko kono kow ogtuu to koddi ka nigtagaran now no Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan.”
No sikaniu no nohimu no suguonon to songo otow, og-awoson no ogpaagad-agad kow to mgo igbuyag now. Woy og-awoson no ogtahuron now sikandan. Kono do no ian ta ro ogtahuron ka makolkohoy-u woy ka molungangon no igbuyag ko kono no ka tibo kandan lagkos to mgo igbuyag no ogdoogdoog to sakup dan.
kadkad
Nò, sikan ian, ko duon igtubad dan no ighusoy to salo to songo otow, songo og-awoson dan to songo duon igbogoy ran no ighusoy to kandan no lawa su songo ogpakasalo dod.
Ko iam on ogsilò ka allow, ka baloy, ogkasugat to layag to allow no ogmalayat ka along.
labot
Dio to lunsud to Listra, duon otow no ogpakapinpinnuu ro duon su napogkot ka mgo paa rin no waro mokohipanow ligkat to pogkootow rin.
Kono no litos ko og-inum ki to sikan no woig to bogas to bunal to pogdoromdom ta to langosa ni Hisus no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy songo og-inum ki to inumanon no igkasayo to mgo busow. Woy songo kono no litos ko ogkoon ki to sikan no paan oyow ogdoromdom ki to lawa to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy songo ogkoon ki to sikan no ingkatubad to mgo busow.
Og-agbas ka masakit to sosolobon woy ka poka ni Anggam.
Dio to ampow to sikan no baul, duon ka nohimu no inotow to daruwa no noiling to diwata to Magboboot no igmaganangon to duon ka Magboboot to marani. Ka ampow to sikan no baul, natorongan to pakpak dan no nighingaranan dan to Pasayluanan to Magboboot. Di waro igliwak noy kuntoon to igbatbat ka tibo.
lopas
Ka ngaran to sikan no bituon, Mapoit. No nigmapoit on ka igkatatolu no baad to tibo no mgo woig. Woy mohon-ing ka mgo otow no ogkamatoy su ligkat to ogpokoinum on to sikan no woig.
Pog-anad din kandan nig-udling din to, “Bantoy kow to sika mgo talag-anad to Balaod no maroyow ran to oghihipanow duon to palingki no og-ilis to malayat no kinabo no ogkoiniatan dan to ogtahuron to mgo otow sikandan ko ogkumustoon dan sikandan dio.
Pogkarinog ni Hirodis to soini, impoumow rin ka mgo otow no mamimituon. Pogpokouma ran dio to kandin no ian sikandan do, pig-insaan din sikandan ko kon-u ian nigsilo ka bituon no nakita ran.
diù
sunud
Ogmataloytoy, matul-id woy ma-awang ka pogsabut ta.
Ogmagasò ka agoloy. Ogmalintok ka pusù.
kayu
Ka otow no oghahabol to manggad, igsonson din ka balila to sikan no hinabal din.
Pasayu nu to’glu-lù.
ko og-ampu koy to Magboboot no ian Amoy ta, su kono noy ogkalingawan to oghingaranan ka maroyow no oghimuon now no ogligkat to pogtuu now ki Hisu Kristu. Woy ognangon koy ka ogpoomotan now ka sikan no oghimuon now su ligkat to dakol so goinawa now kandin. Iglagkos, ignangon noy to og-aguantoon now ka igkabaybayari now su dakol ka pog-iman-iman now kandin no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu.
Kono man su tongod to mgo maroot no batasan ta, warad on poron labot ta su ogkounawa ki to otow no namatoy no konad on ogpokohilabot to sikan.
tubod
solom
lumut
dut
tilaa
buntug
No taman to waro katamanan, ungod og-oobol no ka sikan no hapuy no igbayadbayad kandan. Agad maallow to marusilom, ogkabaybayaran ka tibo no ogsimba to sikan no magintalunan woy ka inotow-otow rin woy ka agad hontow no ogpapangotob to ngaran din dio to mgo bukod dan woy ko dio to mgo kawanan no bolad dan.” Ian ka innangon to sikan no diwata.
Ka otow no oghimu to gakit, ogkuò to kayu no ogbalo-ugan din no oghikotan to iggu-os.
Di og-awoson to waro maroot no ogpakaamut to batasan ta unawa to songo waro solug no maroot dio to batasan to Magboboot no nig-abin kanta.
pirisuan
Nataga ka to sikan no mgo igkabaybayari ku no dio a to mgo lunsud to Antiokia, Ikuniu woy ka Listra. Nataga ka ko songo monu ka nig-aguanta ku no igkabaybayari ku. Di ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, nigpangabang kanak to tibo.
bidbid
olat
Ko iam ka ganat, konò ogkakanat su mabogong.
Ko warò tanò dan, mgo agpot sikandan
Nò, ligkat to nigpangabangan kinow on to mgo salo ta, duon on ogkatagaran ta no ogtumanon dod to Magboboot. Ogkataga ki to waro pad matumani ka sikan no ogkatagaran ta, su ko natuman pa, kono kid on poron ogpokoiman-iman to pogtuman din.
Di natagaan ni Hisus to duon bantaan to goinawa to mgo otow. Kagi rin, “Kono man ogkaayun ka ogkagion now no nahan now no ian og-awoon ku ka mgo busow su nahan now no ogligkat ki Biilsibul. Konon litos ka ogkagion now su ogkounawa ian ko ogkalibulung ka mgo sakup to songo igbuyag no ogmabunbunuoy, magaan do ogkaawo ka pandatuan dan, woy ko malasi ogpog-ogotoy ka mgo sulod no og-ugpo to sagboka no baloy, magaan ogpakagsuwoysuwoy on ka sika pamiliya no konad ogbubuligoy. Songo unawa,” kagi, “ko pananglitan pa, nigligkat ki Satanas no ian igbuyag to mgo busow ka indogil ku to soi songo busow, songo ogkaawo poron ka katondanan ni Satanas to og-alap to sakup din.
pongpong
Ko du-on otow no ogpanumbaloy, insa-an ta ko nokoy na-an bag ka tu-ud nu?
To nigkita ka mgo otow to nighimu ni Hisus ka koin-inuan no ogdakolon din ka paan, mgo isda, kagi ran, “Soini man naan ka sika Talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no innangon to mgo talagnangon dongan to ogpokouma kai to kalibutan.” Ian ka kagi ran.
“Nokoy naan ka inhondio now to sikan no holholawan? Og-inso a kaniu ko ian do ogpitawon now porom ka sagboka no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot? Hoo,” kagi ni Hisus, “Ognangonan ku sikaniu to labow pad to talagnangon ka nakitaan now
son-ad
Nokoy hanow ku?
Tontonon to doun to payow.
Du-on laplap no mo-itom woy du-on mo-itom-itom no laplap.
Uromo ogkaawo ka soini no langit woy soini tano, di kono ogkaawo ka mgo kagi ku.”
Pagibgibo-oy si Lugtom ki Gibangon.
labung
Du-on otow no nalagak ka salapi din no darua no gatus. Nigbungku do du-on to namangho di waro din on kita-a.
Woy ku ogtutunga ogkalimud ka kayu.
Ka buyag no otow, konad ogpoko-orol ka oghipanow su mamasakit on ka bu-ol din
Nigliwag si Banlak.
Mgo sulod, waro man pulus ko duon otow no ognangon to dakol ka pogtuu rin di maroot ka batasan din. Ian su kono ki ogkapangabangan ligkat to pogtuu ta ro ko waro maroyow no batasan ta no ogpakalagkos.
palpal
gomow
Duon otow no tahan no nigpuun to lunsud to Arimatia, no si Husi ka ngaran din. Sikandin, songo igbuyag dod to mgo taga Hudia di maroyow no otow woy maroyow ka batasan din.
To marani on ogpokouma sikandan dio to lunsud no ogkaratongan to sika darua no otow, si Hisus, ogparagas porom oghipanow,
itis
Og-awoson to kono now oggawayi ka goinawa now. Doromdom kow to kono ogkoholosan ka Magboboot to batasan ta, mgo pogdoromdom ta. Pananglitan, ko nokoy no boni ka igpamula ta, songo sikan dod ka ogkagaani ta. Ogkounawa rod kanta su ogkabobootan ki to Magboboot ko nokoy ka ogkohimu ta ko maroyow woy ko maroot su ogkitoon din man ka tibo.
Ko ogbugsi on ka bulutut, ogsolug to langosa ka nanò din.
sabuk
abalang
goinawa
Nò, to nohimu si Hisus no talagpanubad, waro nigligkat to kaap-apuan din kai to tano ko naayun to sikan no Balaod ni Moisis. Di ian to nohimu si Hisus no talagpanubad su nigligkat atag to kabogbogan to pogkouyag din no waro katamanan.
Iling kow ro kanak su ogpamangho a to dalan ku to oyow ko ogkohimu, ka tibo no mgo otow ogkarago to tibo no oghimuon ku. Kono ku ro ogdoromdomon ka ogpakabulig do kanak di lagboy ku ogdoromdomon ka ogpakabulig to tibo no mgo otow to oyow ogkapangabangan poron sikandan.
Agpas ka no ogsakoru su maga-an og-uran.
layag
Pitow ka! Pogdinog ku to kagi nu, nigwoilwoil on ka bato ku kai to gotok ku to igkarago din.”
goinawa
Woy nignangonan to Igbuyag ka dangob no mgo suguanon din to, ‘Nakapanagana on ka tibo no pogkoon to kasal to anak ku, di kono no litos no ogpokohondii ka mgo nigtugunan ku.
wolok
Ka Magboboot no ian ligkatan to ogpokoiman-iman ki to karoyawon, sikandin ka ogbuyuon ku to oyow ogbogayan kow rin to dakol no igkarago now woy to maawang no goinawa now to duma now no ogligkat to pogtuu now kandin. No ian to oyow, ligkat to kabogbogan to Gimukud to Magboboot, ogkohogot on ka pog-iman-iman now to sikan no igkabogoy to Magboboot kaniu.
Ian do ka kagi ran su agad hari ni Hisus sikandan wa dan pad nigtuu kandin.
Ka otow no ogponod to goinawa ko ogsulungan sikandin, ka ogkoumaan to ogpakaponod to goinawa  [no] maawang ka pog-ugpò din.
baratu
Di ka mgo maroot no koiniatan ta, duon on tahan. Di ko nigdinog ki to innangon to sikan no Balaod, nasi natimulan ka pogkoiniat ta to agad nokoy no kono no litos. Ian su, ko waro pa Balaod no nalop-angan ta, waro ki poron mataga to nakasalo kid.
Kono no sikan do, di ogkoubatan noy poron sikaniu tongod to Magboboot su nignangonan noy sikaniu to nigbobootan to Magboboot si Hisus oyow ogkouyag on ligkat to kamatayon din. Dokad di, ko kono no tu-tuu to duon pogkouyag to mgo nammatoy, waro din nanaan mootawi sikandin.
“Hoo,” kagi ni Hisus, “woy malogot ka soin no kagi ku kaniu to agad hondoi no otow no og-ongkoran din ka ugpaan din woy ko hari rin woy ko kakoy rin woy ko amoy rin woy ko inoy rin woy ko anak din woy ko tano din, ko og-ongkoran din oyow ogpasakup koddi agad oyow ognangonnangon to Maroyow no Nangnangonon,
Ka ogkoilingan dan, ian ogkounawaan ka innangon dongan to tu-tuu ian no pananglitan to, “Nigkoon to asu ka nig-ilob din, no ka babuy no pigdigus, nighutuk man do nigtutuno.”
lipukpuk
Du-on ka mgo batò no ogko-on no moon-ing ka ogkoko-ulug no mgo ko-onon diò to so-og.
Ian su ka otow no og-alap to katondanan, suguanon sikandan to Magboboot to oyow ogmaroyow ka pog-ugpo ta. Di ko oghimu ki to maroot, litos ian no ogkahallok ki su malogot ian to duon katondanan dan to oglogpad kanta to maagbot no iglogpad, su suguanon sikandan to Magboboot no ogpakatuman sikandan to koiniatan to Magboboot ko oglogparan dan ka mgo otow no oghimu to maroot.
“Sikan ian mgo sulod, sonditi now on ka mgo batasan now no maroot woy halina now ka goinawa now dio to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus oyow ogkaawo on ka mgo salo now woy oyow ogkabogayan kow to maawang no goinawa no ogligkat to ogdanian kow nikandin.
duma
baluy
man
No dio to Tiru, nigpamangho koy to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus. Pogkita noy on, dio koy nigtagood nig–ugpo to papitu no allow. No ligkat to impohitaga to Gimukud to Magboboot to mgo nigtuu, nanangonan dan on si Pablo to oyow kono din oghondio to Hirusalim.
baghot
Nokani no nighondio a to Masidonia, duon poron goinawa ku no ogsagpit a pad duon to kaniu woy songo ogsagpit a poron oghutuk ko oglibong a no dio ad on ogligkat to Masidonia. Ian su oyow ogpakabulig kow poron kanak ko ogparagas ad on dio to ugpaan to Hudia.
Ko balutu, darua ka balo-ugan ka oghikotan to katig.
Di agad og-aguantoon ta ka igkabaybayari ta ko oglogparan ki ko duon salo ta di kono ki man ogsayoon to Magboboot. Di ko maroyow ka oghimuon ta, agad ogbogayan ki to igkabaybayari ta, ogkohoy-uan ki to Magboboot ko og-aguantoon ta.
pitu
higod
sogdu
to-ul
puang
Ogkogò ki ko oglopow to baloy ko mgo boi na-an dò ka nig-ugpò.
mikot
Bulisung
giman
Di ka mgo nabutud woy ka mgo napulid namanhondio kandin to Dakol no Ampuanan no nigpanbawian din sikandan tibo.
Aang-aang no tapiason ta su nigbogoy man kanta to piak.
mundùn
tinirul
Nò, natokow si Sakarias to duon on ka songo diwata no suguanon to Magboboot no niglopow kandin. Duon do nigsasindog ka diwata dio to ogkakawanan to tubaranan to palina.
Ka kalù, torong dod di du-on ngaran.
Ko ogka-asawa rin on, ogbulasan din on ka taloy-u no insabuk din oyow ogkatapid ka doromdom to sikan asawa rin
Ogbuyu a to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow to Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow no si Hisu Kristu.
dampias
angkon
woy kono ogligkat to pogkoibog do duon to lawa now no ogkounawa ro to mgo otow no waro mataga to Magboboot.
Ka sikan no ma-agkap so goinawa ta, ogkalituk to, ma-awang ka goinawa ta. Ogpakasalig ki kandin.
Nokouma on ka igkasampulu woy lalimma to tuid to pogsugu to Punuan dio to lunsud to Ruma no si Tibirius Sisar. Nokogdongan si Punsiu Pilatu no ian gobirnador dio to Probinsia to Hudia. Si Hirodis ka Datu dio to Galilia. Ka hari ni Hirodis no si Pilipi, kandin ka igbuyag to mgo ugpaan dio to Ituria woy ka Trakoniti, no si Lisanias, sikandin ka igbuyag dio to ugpaan to Abilina.
polaan
Ian su, agad to nool-ologan sikandan to lagboy no mohirap no igkabaybayari ran woy to noil-iluan on lagboy to og-awoson dan, di nasi narago lagboy. No ligkat to sikan, dakol lagboy ka imbogoy ran to mgo duma ran no nigtuu no songo noil-iluan on to og-awoson to pog-ugpo dan.
panga
Si Hakub amoy ni Husi no asawa ni Maria. Si Maria inoy ni Hisu Kristu. Si Hisu Kristu oghingaranan to Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan
busbus
Ian su waro pad pulus to sikan no nasabutan ko duon dod ka nigpohimu to sabut, su woy ro ogkatuman ko ogkamatoy on sikandin.
imù
Duon dod duma no nakaparong to makahallokhallok no logdog to hapuy. Duon duma no nohimatayan porom to moirob di nakapanalia. Tibo, waro porom amana dayagang dan di nabogayan to Magboboot to og-awoson dan no dayagang no nigmanokal on sikandan to ogmoog-ogotoy. Nokogsuwoysuwoy on ka mgo sundalu no nan-agpot no oglusud poron kandan.
su ogkasaligan atag sikandin. Agad ko ubaton ka tibo no mgo otow, tu-tuu ian atag ka kinagian to Magboboot. Ka sikan, ogkounawa to soini no ingkasulat dongan to talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, no nigkagian din ka Magboboot to, “To tibo no ignangon nu, duon igmalogot to tu-tuu ian. No ko og-in-insaan ka to agad hontow, kono ogkohimu ko ogkaroog ka.”
Og-awoson to og-ayad-ayad kinow oyow kono ogkaatangan ka maroyow no pogdumaruma ta woy ogkaparagas ka pogkasagboka ta no ogligkat to maawang no goinawa ta no imbulig to Gimukud to Magboboot kanta.
Di magaan nigkagi si Hisus no kagi rin, “Manokala now ka goinawa now. Kono kow ogkahallok su sikoddi do duon.”
Nigpoomot koy to talabau noy oyow ogkabayaran noy ka ogkakoon noy. Agad ko oglomotan koy di ogbuyu koy atag to Magboboot to oyow ogkohoy-uan din sikandan. Ko duon otow no ogbayadbayad kanami, og-aguantoon noy ro duon.
to-ul
Sagboka na-an dò no supa.
To nigligkat si Hisus to Hordan no woig natogob sikandin to kabogbogan to Gimukud to Magboboot no nigpohondio to Gimukud to Magboboot si Hisus to holholawan.
Ko oggoram ki to lobag no warò pad nigbugsi, ogmasakit ka logoylogoy ta kai to la-ang.
Songo nabaybayaran a to pogtuman ku to mgo talabau ku. No pila buwa no marusilom no waro igkohirogo ku. Woy malasi a ogkoibog no ogkoon woy ogpokoinum-inum ad ian poron di waro ogkakoon woy ogkoinum ku. Woy songo malasi a ogkagonnow su waro litos no sabinit woy ko ogkougpaan ku.
digon
Ogpan-ulugon ta ka ig-orok no bonì.
Nigtabak ka sikan no malotoy to, “Hoo poron, Buyag, di waro duma ku to oghonat koddi dio to woig ko ogkasiuan on. Ko dio a pad to dalan, ogpokohun-a on ka dangob no otow.”
Dokad di duon dangob no ogtitigus koddi. Nataga a to malogot ka innangon din bahin koddi.”
Ko dio pad to dalan, natagbu to mgo suguonon din no pignangonan to, “Noulian on ka anak nu.”
lampoy
Ka dumptruk no nighatod to batu, ogbus-ugon din on.
Ian to soini ka ignangon ku kaniu mgo sulod su nanangonan a to mgo duma ni Klui to ogpaap-apuloy kow.
Ogbuyu a to oyow ka Amoy ta no ka Magboboot woy ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu, ogbogoy kaniu to maawang no pog-ugpo now woy to oyow ogdakol ka goinawa now kandan woy to mgo duma now. Woy ogbuyu a to oyow ogdakol ka pogsalig now to Magboboot woy si Hisus.
Ka nasubid no asu, ogpamulugpulug oyow ogkamara ka lawa rin.
libù
Sikan ian, ko duon otow no kono ogpamminog to soini no ignangon noy, kono no otow ka ogbalagaron din ko kono no ka Magboboot ka ogkabalagaron din, no ian ka ogbogoy kanta to Gimukud din.
Di nigpasasindog on ni Pedro si Kornilio, no kagi ni Pedro to, “Sasindog kad. Kono ka ogsimba kanak su un–unawa ki ro no otow.”
No pananglitan, su nasagboka a ki Hisus no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, nakasabut a to waro agad nokoy no ngalap no kono ipakoon to Magboboot kanta. Di ko duon otow no ogpakaroromdom to kono no litos no ogkakoon din, ogkohimu on to kono oglitos kandin to ogkoon.
Ka losok no ulod mabatok-batok ka batok to lawa rin.
Di waro kandan makasabut to nigkagian sikandan to Magboboot no Amoy ka innangon din.
Ko sunud no allow, nigdinog ka mohon-ing no mgo otow to nigdatong on dio to Pagkoonan dio to Hirusalim to songo ogdatong si Hisus dio to Hirusalim.
lokang
Ko du-on og-iow to babuy, kalabow, kuddò ogsugù koy to, "Dalangin kow su du-on nangiow to babuy. Purut kow to agad songo kilo."
alukuy
lulun
Ko nakarinog ka sampulu no hibatoon ni Hisus, nabolu sikandan ki Santiago woy ki Huan.
pannigda
salodingan
Ka mgo sumpul to soini no lawa ta, kono ta igbogoy no ighimu to maroot. Di atag, igbogoy ta to oyow ka Magboboot ka ogboot kanta su oyow ka mgo sumpul to lawa ta ka ighimu ta to maroyow, su sikan ian ka litos no oghimuon ta su naawo kid on to kamatayon no nabogayan kid on to iam no pogkouyag ta.
katilias
Nò, su ka kamatayon to tibo no otow, dio ian nigligkat to salo to sagboka ro no otow no si Adan, dakoldakol pad man ka imanon ta no ogligkat ki Hisu Kristu su ogkabogayan ki ro duon to dakol no pogkohoy-u to Magboboot no oghimuon kinow rin no maroyow dio to tangkaan din. No ogkabogayan kinow to kouyagan no waro katamanan no ogpakalagkos kinow ki Hisu Kristu to pogsugu din.
gapas
Pogkaponga, nighipanow on si Hisus dio to kabayaan din no nigkita rin ka sagboka no otow no talagkubla to buhis. Ka ngaran din no si Libi. Dio nigpinnuu to upisina rin to bayaranan to mgo otow to buhis dan. Kagi ni Hisus ki Libi to, “Duma ka koddi; ogsakupon ku sikoykow.”
Du-on mgo ayam ku.
Kono ta og-unugon ka batasan ni Kain no naabin to igbuyag to mgo busow no nigbunu din ka hari rin. Manio to nighimatayan din? Ian su nabolu si Kain su noima to hari rin su maroyow ka nighimu to hari rin, di maroot atag ka mgo hinimuan ni Kain.
Ko narinog on ka sikan no tabak ni Hisus, nahan to mgo nigtuu no kono ogkamatoy ka sikan no hibatoon. Di loin ka lituk to kagi ni Hisus. Kagi rin atag, “Ko sikan ka goinawa ku to kono ogkamatoy sikandin taman to iglibong ku kai to soin no kalibutan, waro man labot nu, Pedro.” Waro din nignangon to kono ogkamatoy sikandin.
bayaku
Di ko ian ligkatan to igkabaybayari ta ka pogtuu ta ki Kristu, kono kid ogkasipod. Di ogpasalamatan ta ka Magboboot su nohimu kid on no sakup ni Kristu.
No nokouma ka songo igbuyag to anaranan to mgo og-ampu no si Hairu ka ngaran din. Pogkita rin ki Hisus, nigluhud dio to tangkaan din.
lugtus
Nò, impasasindog ni Hisus ka songo bato no dio to tangkaan to mgo hibatoon din. To nigsakupu rin ka bato nigkagian din ka mgo hibatoon din.
sundul
“Ogpitawon ku poron,” kagi ni Pablo, “no kono ad ogkita su nabutud ad on su ligkat to sikan no malayag lagboy. Sikan ian to pigkitkit ad to mgo duma ku no nigparagas koy on nigsolod dio to lunsud to Damasku.”
su ogbobootan din on ka tibo no mgo otow. No oglogparan din on ka tibo no mgo otow no kono ogtaud kandin tongod to tibo no nanhimu ran no maroot woy ka mgo impandoot dan kandin.”
Di ko dakol ka kalaglagan to songo otow no ogkitoon din to duon awoson to duma rin no nigtuu, dokad di kono din ogkohoy-uan, kono ogkohimu no duon dakol no goinawa rin to Magboboot.
Pila ro no allow no nigpuun si Hisus dio to lunsud to Nasarit duon to probinsia to Galilia no nokouma dio ki Huan oyow ogpabautismu sikandin ki Huan dio to woig to Hordan.
Ka banug no ogngaranan to mandagit, maga-an ogpandagit to mgo piak to mgo manuk to ogdawiyon din.
su sikan no otow no ogkasaligan to insalig kandin, ogtimulan do ian. Di ka sikan no otow no kono ogkasaligan, oghawion ka agad doisok no insalig kandin.
isu-os
Woy oghirosonan din ka pogtuu now taman to sikan no mohuri no allow su oyow ko ogkatuman on ka sikan no allow to poglibong to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu kai to tano, waro ig-ogot din kaniu.
Oggusi-on tad ka galung ta no pula no ogkito-on tad ka moon-ing no alibutod no og-aliboodbood on.
Sikan ian to duon on sikandan to tangkaan to sikan no pinnuuanan to pandatuan to Magboboot. No allow woy marusilom, dio ian sikandan to dakol no Ampuanan to Magboboot no ungod dan ogsimboon sikandin. No ka Magboboot no ogpinpinnuu to pogboboot din, ungod ogdumaruma kandan woy ogtantanuran din sikandan.
Nakarinog ka sikan no boi to mgo oghimuon ni Hisus no ian din nig-amut to mohon-ing no mgo otow no ogsundul kandin. Kagi to goinawa rin, “Ko ogpakasamsam a to sikaran to kinabo din do ogkoulian a to dalu ku.”
Mo-omis ka kindi su du-on asukal.
Ogkapakoy on no oglayang ka ariplano su naroyoyow on.
lamitan
Ka ignangon now, kono ogligkat to kaniu no pogdoromdom di ogligkat to Gimukud to Amoy ta no Magboboot ka ogkagion now.
Sikan ian to nanhondio ka mgo sundalu dio to pirisuan. Di pogpuwas dan to lokob, warad on man ka mgo suguanon dio to solod. Nanlibong ka mgo sundalu dio to mgo pogbuyagon to sikan no Dakol no Ampuanan.
no igliwan to katondanan woy mgo hinimuan ni Hudas. Ian su suguanon din dod porom ni Hisu Kristu sikandin di pig–ongkoran din ka katondanan din no nakaparagas no oghondio to ugpaan no ogpakalogpad kandin.”
bugtung
alad
antow
Ka maputì to manukmanuk no og-ugpò to basakan.
Pogkalugoy, niglibuwas on si Sakarias no konad on ogpakakagi. Sikan ian ka igpasabut to mgo otow to duon impakita kandin to Magboboot dio to solod to Ampuanan. Nò, tigbal naan do ogkamoy si Sakarias su noomaw on naan sikandin.
Sikan ian no nakaroromdom on ka mgo boi to malogot ian to sikan ian ka impanoy innangon ni Hisus kandan.
Di soini no paan no ogligkat dio to langit no innangon ku kaniu, ko ogkoonon to agad hontow ka soini no paan, ogkootawan no waro katamanan.”
Ogkapulusan pad sikandan no ogpoobos to duma ran su sikandan ka ogkabogayan to sikan no panagana to Magboboot.
To nalugoy on, niglibong ka igbuyag dan, no nigpitow rin ko noomonu on ka salapi din.
Ko kandila-on ka sukat to calabow, konò og-ayam to mgo otow su nahan no ogpanukat.
hinanow
Ka otow no konò ogko-ibog ka ogko-on, ogkapogul no ogtalabau su wà dayagang.
Konò a oghondiò su ogkapogul a.
No ko kono a pad ogkamatoy, ogpakalibong a dio to kaniu no ogkasayo now on ian si Hisu Kristu.
Ka gamut, ogsabukan ki oyow maga-an ki ogkamatoy.
Nigsaparan ka mgo talangas to oyow kono dan ogdaaton ka mgo pangamuton, woy ka mgo kayu, woy ka agad nokoy no mgo pinamula. Di ian dan do oghisakitan ka mgo otow no waro pangotob dio to bukod dan no igpatokod to sakup sikandan to Magboboot.
Nigtabak sikandan to, “Hoo Buyag, ogtuu koy.” Nò, nigsamsam din ka mgo mata ran no nigkagi to, “Ogkabawian kow su nigtuu kow koddi.”
su ian ogpakaboot to tibo no oghimuon noy, ka dakol no goinawa ni Hisu Kristu kanta su sikandin do ka sagboka no namatoy no inliwan to tibo no mgo otow. No ka sikan, ogkounawa to ka tibo no mgo otow, nammatoy to mgo salo dan.
Nataga kow, mgo sulod, to dakol ka igkohoy-u to Lagboy to Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu, su agad to datu lagboy sikandin dio to Langit di ko nighondiid on to tano, nohimu on no publi. No ka tuud to sikan to oyow ligkat to kandin no ingkapubli, ogkohimu kinow on no datu to pogtuu ta.
Ko ogtingkik ki to bangan no batu, oglagsik ka baga.
ul-ul
No ian mohuri no ogkaroog din no usig ka pogkamatoy to mgo otow.
No ka sikan no napulid, pogpitow rin ki Pedro woy si Huan no ogsolod to ampuanan, nigbuyu kandan.
manio naan no waro nu pasambayi ka salapi ku oyow og-anak woy ogkatimulan ko ogpokouli ad?’
Kuntoon, ogtabak a to sikan no inso now ko litos ko ogkoon ki to ayam no ingkatubad to sikan no pig-ampuan dan no kono no tu-tuu no magboboot. Sikanta no nohogot on ka pogtuu ta, nataga kinow tongod to sikan no og-ampuan dan to kono ogpokoomonu kanta su kono no tu-tuu. Di og-awoson to kono ta igparakoldakol ka sikan no katagaanan ta su ian do atag ogpakabulig to pogtuu to duma ta ko dakol ka goinawa ta kandan.
Nigluhud no nigpooy-u-hoy-u kandin ka soini no duma rin no suguanon no kagi rin to, ‘Bogayi a bag to pila ro no allow no ogpamitow a to igbayad ku koykow. Ogliwanan ku ka salapi nu.’
Naponga soini, duon dio ka sagboka no lukos no si Husi no taga Arimatia. Sakup ni Hisus sikandin di inholos din ka mgo otow su ogkahallok to mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu. Nighondio sikandin ki Pilatu no nigbuyu din ka lawa ni Hisus. Nigbogoy si Pilatu no nig-awo din on.
tigbal dò
Ka igkarua, ko pananglitan ogligkat pa ki Satanas ka kabogbogan ku to igdogil ka mgo busow, og-inso a pad kaniu ko hondoi man ogpuun ka kabogbogan to mgo sakup now ko ogdogilon dan ka mgo busow? Sikandan man ka ognangon to nasayop kow.”
Di ko duon ig-atang dut mata ta, marusilom do ian dio to goinawa ta. Unawa rod, ko maroot ka goinawa ta, maroot lagboy ka tibo no oghimuon ta.”
no ka Gimukud to Magboboot, nigpohulughulug no ogkounawa to salapati no dio ki Hisus niglatun, no duon narinog no kagi ligkat to langit no nigkagi ki Hisus to, “Sikoykow ka koddi no anak no indakoli to goinawa ku. Dakol ka igkarago ku koykow.”
No kagi ni Pedro to, “Nò, sikaniu tibo no mgo pinanganak ni Israil, indani now to malogot ian ka ignangon ku kaniu. Ian su si Hisus no inlansang now dio to krus oyow ogkamatoy, ian on ka pighimu to Magboboot no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy sikandin dod ka Im–imanan to mgo Koot–otawan no oghingaranan ta ki Kristu.”
saliow
Sikaniu no kono no Hudiu, ian ta nounawaan ka mgo sugpang to kayu no waro ikapamula no pig-awo to Magboboot to tahan no ugpaan dan no dio din isumpul to ingkapamula rin no kayu no ulibu no kono no tahan no lawa ran. Di ka mgo Hudiu, ian ta nounawaan ka mgo sugpang no naawo to tahan no ugpaan dan no kayu no ulibu. Ay man no ogkohimu sikaniu no igkasumpul kow to kono poron no kaniu no kayu, dakoldakol pad ka pogkohimu to Magboboot ko oglibongan din isumpul ka tahan no sugpang dio to tahan no lawa ran no ulibu.
lamiak
panalarap
sinagop
Dokad di, mgo sulod, ogsayoon ta ka Magboboot su ligkat to nasagboka kinow on ki Hisu Kristu, ogkounawa ki to mgo narakop din no ungod din og-al-alagad no igpayag din to tibo no mgo otow. No ligkat kanami, ogpanhitagoon din ka tibo no mgo otow tongod ki Hisus. No ka sikan, ogkounawa to moomut no og-uwang no ogtangkap dio to agad hondoi.
tanow
Ogpabubu-oyoy ka darua no lukos ko hontow kandan ka dayagangon.
Ogbuyu koy to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow to Magboboot no ian Amoy tanow woy to oyow songo ogkohoy-uan kow ni Hisu Kristu no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. Maroyow ko ogbogayan kow ran to maawang no goinawa now.
Ampu kow pa to Magboboot oyow ogsugu sikandin to mgo suguonon din oyow oggaani dio to kandin no kamot.”
No sikaniu no mgo amoy, kono now pasubloi ka igmasakit to goinawa to mgo anak now, oyow kono ogkasundug ka goinawa ran.
Ko ogtambabo-on nu ka duma nu, nigdo-isokan nu to goinawa nu.
su mapoit lagboy ka igkabaybayari now to sikan no allow. Waro ogpokounawa kai to soin no kalibutan no unawa to mgo soin, puun to poghimu to Magboboot to soin no kalibutan. Agad ko ogkataman ka soin no igkabaybayari warad on ogpokounawa taman to taman.
gotgot
“No nignangonan a to Gimukud to Magboboot to, ‘Duma ka kandan woy kono ka ogduwaruwa no ogduma.’ ” Kagi ni Pedro to, “Ka soini no mgo sulod ta no taga Hupi no hon–om, ian ka duma ku to nighondio to Sisaria. No nigsolod koy to baloy woy ni Kornilio.”
Di duon dod dongan ka igmalogot to Magboboot kandan to duon ian sikandin no Magboboot, su maroyow ka pighimu rin. No impapitow rin kandan ka nohimu rin no mgo uran, woy ka mgo maroyow no tiggaani no ian man immaroyow to goinawa now woy songo igkarago now to duon ogkakoon now.”
Ka sikan no nigpa-abin din diò to songo otow, impoid din ka salò din.
To nig-uugpo dio to kandan, mohon-ing pad ka nigtuu kandin tongod to kandin no nangnangonon kandan.
Ka poggongon ku to ngalap no matirong, nigsogò a to bolad ku su nigpali-an to dugi no nigpanigbion ka ilok ku.
Ma-am-amanoloy ka mgo otow su mataltalaroy ka mgo otow ko du-on ogkako-on dan.
No ka inoy to sika nigsayow, impakagi rin to anak din dio ki Hirodis to, “Ogkuon ku kai kuntoon ka ulu ni Huan no Talagbautismu no ipasabuk nu to palanggana.”
Ko konò din ogtibugon, ogmaro-ot sikandin to duma rin su oghimuon kandin to salò.
Kagi ni Istiban, “Mgo amoy woy mgo sulod, pamminog kow to soini no igtabak ku kaniu. Dongan, ka Magboboot no ian ta oghingaranan to malayag, nigpapitow to kaap–apuan ta no si Abraham. No dio pad nig–ugpo sikandin to ugpaan to Misopotamia no waro pad moghalin dio to lunsud to Haran.
pakibabuy
pamusiit
Ko ogpananap ka batò, ilud dod.
Nabolongbolong ka mgo otow to pog-anad ni Hisus su duon kabogbogan din to og-anad.
Nig-inso ni Hisus kandin to, “Manio naan to oghingaranan a nu to maroyow? Ka Magboboot do ka maroyow.
Ogpanamporon din ka sugpang ku no kono ogbogas woy ogpugpugan din ka tibo no mgo sugpang no ogpamogas su oyow ogmaawang woy ogkatimulan pad to bogas dan.”
Ka agsam, oghimuon no tikos.
no pigbogayan on to nasulatan dongan ni Isaias to kagi to Magboboot. Nigbolat din on ka nasulatan no nigbatuk din pad ka ingkasulat dongan no nigbasa rin on to:
Nò, nigsugu ni Hisus ka darua no hibatoon din no kagi rin, “Oghondio kow to Hirusalim no lunsud. Ko ogpokouma kow, ogpakatagbu kow to sagboka no otow no ogtiang to kuron no igsakaru rin to woig.
Niggupal on woy nigtaladtalad dan on woy impa-abin dan ka ulu to nigbaba to sikan no babuy
tabubulog
Ka soini no sulat, ogligkat kanak no si Pablo, no suguanon a ni Hisu Kristu su nigbobootan a to Magboboot no talagpangabang kanta. Woy nigbootan a rod ni Hisu Kristu no ian im-imanan ta.
Ko ogkoumaan kow to sikan no allow, ka Amoy ku ka ogbuyuan now no ogsampiton now ka ngaran ku. Konad no og-awos no dii kow pad ogbuyu to koddi
to ian nu ro oghimuon no pogbuyagon, ka lukos no waro maroot no batasan din, woy og-awoson to sagboka ro ka asawa rin, woy to ogtuu on ka mgo anak din woy to kono no maroot so mgo batasan dan, woy og-awoson to ogpaagad-agad sikandan to amoy ran.
Ko bo-ot to amoy woy inoy no oghimuon nu no pamilia nu, konad no agpot sikandan; sakup nu.
lagut
Ko ogdilinan ki ogsaparan ki oyow kono kid oghimu to insapad.
Nignangon si Hisus to, “Ka Pogsugu to Magboboot ogkounawa to soini. Duon sagboka no otow no duon kamot din no nigpamulaan din to bunal no oghingaranan to ubas. Soini no otow, nigsolomsolom no nighipanow no ogpamitow to mgo otow to ogpatalabauwon din dio to nigpamulaan din to ubas.
Pogkataga rin, nigsugu din sikandan dio to Bitlihim. Kagi rin, “Ay-ayari now to pamangho to sikan no bato no ko ogkitoon now on ka bato, libong kow dii to koddi su oghondian ku sikandin oyow ogsimboon ku sikandin.”
“Nò, agad manalingboka kow ro, kono kow ogkahallok,” kagi ni Hisus, “su ka Amoy now no dio to Langit, nohoy-u kaniu no nigboot din to ogbogayan kow to katondanan dio to Pandatuan din uromo.”
Nò, nig-awo dan ka sikan no batu no inlokob. Si Hisus, niglonghag dio to langit no kagi rin, “Amo, ogpasalamat a koykow to ogpamminog ka koddi.
Kagi ran kuwo kandin, “Hontow ka naan? Sikoykow buwa si Elias?” Nigtabak ni Huan, “Kono no sikoddi.” Kagi ran man do to, “Koykow buwa ka sika so talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no ogtagaran noy.” “Kono no sikoddi,” kagi ni Huan.
Iglobong diò to tanò to daruwa no allow ka pogbatuk to sikan no agkud. Oglong-ug di mo-omis.
Woy naawo on ka langit. No ian ogkounawaan ka papil no ogkalulun on. No ka tibo no mgo bubungan woy ka mgo pulu to dagat, ogkahalin on.
Kagi rin to, “Songo malogot ka soi ogkagion ku kaniu. Tibon otow, ogkounawa to namatoy su nakaawoy to Magboboot. No, ogpokouma on, nò, noumaan kid on to allow no ogdinogon to mgo otow no ogkounawa to namatoy sikandan to kagi ku. Woy sikan no otow no ogpamminog to kagi ku, ogkouyag do no waro katamanan.
Agad mointok.
guligow
layag
“Pamuyu kow dio to Magboboot, woy ogbogayan kow rin to og-awoson now. Pammitow kow woy ogpakakita kow to ogpammitawon now. Pangumow kow dio to tano no ogkapuwasan kow rin.
Di sikanami atag, nigsugu koy to Magboboot. Sikan ian, agad hontow no ogdumaruma to Magboboot, songo ogpamminog kanami. Di ka otow no waro nigpasakup to Magboboot kono ogpamminog kanami. Sikan dod ka dangob no igtokod ta ko hondoi ogligkat ka songo nangnangonon, ko dio to Gimukud to Magboboot no ian Gimukud no ognangonnangon to tu-tuu ro ian, woy ko dio ogligkat to loin no ogpasuwoy to mgo otow.
Woy duon nigkita ku no sagboka no mabogbog no diwata to Magboboot. Nigmaagbot ka kagi rin no nig-inso to, “Hontow ka litos no ogloko to mgo imparokot woy to ogbolat to soini no ogbasoon?”
Ogbuyù a to woig su ogko-ibog a.
dan
Ligkat to pogtuu to amoy woy ka inoy ni Moisis, ko nootow sikandin, inholos dan sikandin to tatolu no bulan. No ian dan inholos su nakita ran to maroyow ka bato woy su kono ogkahallok sikandan no oglop-ang to mgo sugu to igbuyag to Ehipto.
tilalam
soggagak
bantok
Kuntoon to nataga kow on to soini no malogot, ogkapulusan kow ko oghimuon now soini.”
Di kagi to mgo otow, ‘Otowoy, Buyag. Duon on sampulu no salapi no bulawan dio to kandin!’
bohow
No sikanak no si Pablo, ian ku ogkounawaan ka natou no talaghimu to sikan no baloy su nigbogayan a to katouanan ku to ogsabuk to batu no ogpounturan to sikan no baloy. No kuntoon, duon duma no og-anad kaniu no ian ogkounawaan ka otow no ig-untud ka suwoy, mgo ka igtangon. Di agad hontow no ogbulig no oghimu to sikan no Baloy to Magboboot, og-awoson no og-ay-ayaran din ka poghimu rin.
“No sikan ian to impaangoy ku sikaniu su oyow ogmaal–alukuyoy kinow. Ian su nokoy naan to ogkohikotan a to karina kai to bolad ku su napirisu a su ogtuuan ku ka otow no og–im–imanan to tibo no mgo kaap–apuan ni Israil.’
Ee, napalisan ka so-ini no nigpintalan ku no alabat.
Ian su, agad ko uripon ki woy ko kono ki no uripon, ko oghimu ki to maroyow, duon igsayo to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus no igbogoy rin kanta no songo maroyow.
Ogsuluk ka magintaunan.
ting-ow
dusilom
No nigsugu koy rin to oyow kai koy on ogtangko to koykow oyow ignangon noy koykow ko nokoy ka igkabolu noy ki Pablo. Ko og–insoinso ka ki Pablo,” kagi, “ogkatagaan nu ro to tu–tuu ian ka tibo no igbabayung noy kandin,” kagi ni Tirtulu ki Gobirnador Pilik.
Kagi ni Hisus kandin, “Sikan no otow no nigpamarigus, malinis ka lawa rin, konad on ogpamarigus oghutuk. Ka paa rin do ka oghugasan din. Malinis kow tibo; ka sagboka ro ka kono no malinis.”
kurung
Ogbobo-ul ka batò to abu. Ogliagan din ka abu.
Ko ogsilò ka bulan, ogkabandogan ka lawa ta to layag to bulan, du-on alung ta.
Nò, dakol lagboy ka igkahallok ta ko ogkoumaan kid on to iglogpad to Magboboot no kono ogkamatoy.
datong
“Sikan ian no ngilam kow woy ungod kow ampu no buyua now rio to Magboboot oyow ogmanokal do ka goinawa now oyow kono kow ogkaroog to igkabaybayari no ogpakaratong kai to ampow to tano, woy oyow waro igkasipod now uromo no ogpakasasindog kow dio to tangkaan ku no Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan,” kagi ni Hisus.
Nokouma on ka allow no litos ki Husi woy si Maria no ogtumanon dan ka Balaod no ingalat ni Moisis dongan tongod to boi no iam pad nig-anak. No nighondio sikandan to Hirusalim dio to Dakol no Ampuanan no nig-alap dan ka bato oyow igpoindanan dan sikandin dio to Magboboot.
sasò
kiwì
salì
Nò, sikaniu no mgo datu. Panoy kow on sinsinogow su dakol ka mgo igkabaybayari no ogpokouma kaniu,
soging
Ka mgo buus woy ka mgo diip no ogbayò to kalasara, og-ikul to dalan dan.
ligu
Nigtabak sikandan to, “Si Sisar no Igbuyag dio to Ruma.” Sikan ian no nignangon si Hisus to “Ko si Sisar ka tagtuun, bogayi nu sikandin. Songo bogayi now ka Magboboot to kandin, agad nokoy, ko kandin ka tagtuun.”
Ogsayow ki’t sagudsug
Ian oyow waro otow no ogpakasayo-sayo to kandin no lawa ko dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.
Ka duma no mgo otow, waro niglangub no og–amut kandan su ogkahallok to nigdinog dan to noomonu si Ananias. Di ka mgo otow no nigtuu, nabantug to tibo no mgo otow to sikan no ugpaan.
hasò
Nò, ka sikan no ulod, duon imbugwak din no dakol no woig ligkat to bo-bo din oyow ogkaanlas on poron ka boi.
Ka dangob pad no pananglitan ni Hisus. Kagi rin, “Agad ko hontow no ogpanakow, woy ogpakasolod to baloy to manokal no otow no ogtakow to kalaglagan din ko ogbakuon din on pad ka sikan no kamunoy no manokal. Nò, ogpakatakow rin on ka agad nokoy.”
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to mgo hibatoon din to, “Pamminog kow, igpohondio ku sikaniu dio to mgo otow no mabulut. Ogkounawa kow to ayam no oghingaranan to karniru no kono mabulut woy sikandan no oghondian now, ogkounawa sikandan to magintalunan no asu no mabulut lagboy. Omunaan no ogpanagana kow di kono kow oghimu to maroot to agad hontow.
To nakabayo on si Hisus mgo hibatoon din to lunsud to Hiriku, mohon-ing lagboy ka mgo otow no nigluyud kandan.
Di ka sikan no mgo otow no og-iling to kagi ran, oglinglingawan dan ka nighimu to Magboboot dongan. No ligkat to kagi rin, nighimu rin ka langit woy ka tano. No ligkat to woig, nagatawan ka tano.
Sikan ian, ko ogpakatood a no ogpanumbaloy dio to kaniu, ignangon ku ka tibo no oghimuon din, woy ka mgo maroot no igbayung kanak. Kono no sikan doka oghimuon din su ko duon mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no ogpanumbaloy poron dio to kandan, kono ogpasoloron ni Diotripis dio to baloy rin woy ogsaparan din ka duma rin no mgo otow no ogkoiniat poron no ogpasolod to sikan no magaliug dio to kandan no baloy. No ko duon otow no ogpasoloron to baloy ran ka sikan no mgo otow no nigtuu no ogpanumbaloy poron, konad on ogbogoy ni Diotripis no og-amut sikandan to mgo duma ran no ogsimba.
Ka pogsalig ta to pogpangabang ni Hisus to salo ta, ian ogkounawa to kalu no putow no igkakalu ta kai to ulu ta. Woy ogpuruton ta ka kinagian to Magboboot. No ian ogkounawa to moirob ta no igbogoy to Gimukud to Magboboot kanta.
sulak
taptap
No ko dio pad woy si Pablo to sikan no mgo lunsud, duon nig–alam dan no mgo pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to mgo limuranan dan. No nig-ampu sikandan woy niglangkad to pogkoon dan. Woy nigsalig sikandan to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus oyow ogtantanuran din ka sikan no mgo otow no naalam dan.
Ko duon otow no nigpasabsabutoy to ogpangasawa di konad on poron ogparagas: di mangkuwan ko ogpakaroromdom ka lukos no nahan din to kono ogpakaponod to ogkoiniatan din woy oggoramon din to og-awoson to ogpangasawa on sikandan, litos ko og-asawoon din on ka boi.
Ka otow no du-on pi-ot, busug woy tunud sikan ka oggamiton to igpano ko oglulubung to manukmanuk.
toming
Di og-awoson atag to oghimuon ta ka igkarago to duma ta no ogtuu ko nokoy ka ogpakamaroyow kandin oyow ogkohogot ka pogtuu rin.
Ka arab, marulag igkakamot su ogsinsinikoton dò to oghiipanow, panagana ko du-on usig.
Patingaan din ka miow.
Ka igkaruwa no poghondio dan, nigpatotokoroy si Husi to mgo kakoy rin. Songo impatokod din ki Paraon ka kandin no mgo kakoy.
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin to, “Kuntoon, ogkohimu su awoson no ogbautismuan a nu su oyow ogkatuman ka tibo no ogkoiniatan to Magboboot.” Nighoo on si Huan woy nigbautismuan din on si Hisus.
No to soini no pogsulat ku koykow, dakol ka pogsalig ku su nataga a to ogpaagad-agad ka kanak. Woy songo nataga a to dakoldakol pad ka oghimuon nu to soini no ogbuyuon ku.
lanang
No nigdinog a kunto-on to warò anak dan no ogkatibug. Ko malasi og-anak, ogkamatoy rò ka batò.
Di kono ka ogpanlabotlabot to sikan no igpaap-apuloy to mgo otow no kono no matul-id woy waro pulus su nataga kow to sikan ka ogligkatan to ogpokog-og-ogotoy on.
dolmol
Pogkarinog to soini to lukos no kono pad amana no buyag, nig-uli sikandin to ugpaan din. Nigmasakit lagboy ka goinawa rin su datu sikandin.
bagu-bù
Konò ogkatimalud ka ikug ni Impì.
guliguli
To nigkita to mgo dalaga no malopot so pogdoromdom dan ka ilawan dan to kulang ka lana ran, nigbuyu sikandan dio to mgo dalaga no malayat so pogdoromdom to, ‘Bogayi koy bag to doisok no lana now, su ogkaparongan on ka kanami no ilawan.’
kuit
hari
Nò, kanak no si Pablo, bolad ku lagboy ka ogsulat to soini to, “Kumusta kow!”
bingow
To dio pad to Hirusalim to Pagkoonan to Paligad si Hisus, mohon-ing no mgo otow no nigtuu kandin su nigkita ran ka mgo koin-inuan din no impakita rin kandan.
Ian su duon ingkasulat no kagi to Magboboot to, “Ay man ka mgo otow no maroyow so batasan, di woy ogkapangabangi ko mohon-ing ka ogkabayaan dan no igkabaybayari. Ian pad naan ka mgo otow no makasasalo woy waro makatilala to Magboboot.”
Nigbuligan on to Magboboot ka mgo sakup din no mgo kapunganan ni Israil, su ka ingkohoy-u rin kandan, waro katamanan su nigdoromdom to Magboboot no innangon din dongan to mgo apu ta no minuna no si Abraham woy niglagkos din ka mgo pinanganak din taman to waro katamanan,” kagi ni Maria.
Patabok nu ka losung su’g-uranan.
dutdut
Ko diad on to lanow, natokow sikandan to dakol no kalamag no nigdakol ka luwak to lanow no nasoloran ka balutu to woig; magaan ogkaponu to woig ka luang din.
lunoy
Nò, ko duon otow no ogkannugan din ka soini no kouyagan din kai to tano, ogkaawo nasi ka kandin no kouyagan no waro katamanan to mohuri no allow. Di sika no otow no ogbalagaron din ka kouyagan din kai to tano no ogkamatoy buwa su puun to ogtumanon din ka koddi no mgo sugu, duon do nasi kandin no kouyagan no waro katamanan uromo to mohuri no allow.
Oghipuguton ta ka woig
ug-ug
bunog
tiklas
Du-on allow no konò ki ogko-ibog. Og-alam ki to ogko-ibogan ta.
No, si Satanas no ian igbuyag to mgo busow, nigsolod on to goinawa ni Hudas no ian oghingaranan ki Iskarioti no kandin ka sagboka to sika sampulu woy darua no hibatoon ni Hisus.
Ka otow no ogkakamot, du-on patamanan din ka ogpo-ilisan ka kamot din no ian ka pabungku-an to kamot din.
Tu-tu-anon ki to’gpusil.
pulipug
Kuntoon,” kagi ni Hisus to sika tagbanwa, “ka ignangon ku koykow, napasaylu on to Magboboot ka tibo no mohon-ing no salo to soini no boi no sikan ian to impakita rin ka dakol no goinawa rin koddi. Ko molintok ka salo no napasaylu to songo otow, songo molintok ka goinawa to sika otow dut otow no niglipuas kandin.”
Ka baloy ko ian dò bintanà, ispiu, mo-ilag dò su ogkito-on ta rò ka limang su ma-awang ka pogpitow ta.
Naponga to sikan, nanhondio si Hisus, mgo hibatoon din to Hudia no probinsia. Dio dan nig-ugpo woy nigpasonob dan ka mgo nigtuu on.
Di nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin, “Nigbawian kud ka sagboka no lukos to sikan no Allow to Oghimoloy no noinuinu kow tibo to pighimu kud.
Ko pinabayo to sagboka no mata nu, og-ongkoran nu ka pogtuu nu to Magboboot, lokata nu woy igdogpak nu. Madmaroyow pa no saboka ro ka mata nu no ogbogayan ka to kouyagan no waro katamanan, to duon darua no mata nu di igdogpak ka dio to hapuy no kono ogkaparongan taman to taman.
Soini naan do mgo sulod ka ignangon noy kaniu. Ampui koy oyow magaan on ogpakatangkap ka kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy to oyow ogkabantug to mgo otow ka soini no nangnangonon unawa to nohimu on dio to kaniu.
atoboy
walis
Ligkat dongan, soini ka innangon to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no igpohitaga rin to soini no oghimuon din.’”
ligpis
gwagoddoy ka kuddò ko og-unturan su oyow og-ulugon ki.
Kuntoon, mgo sulod, ogbuyu koy kaniu to oyow ogtahuron now ka sikan no mgo otow no og-anad kaniu to kinagian to Magboboot. Nig-alam to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta sikandan oyow og-anaron dan sikaniu to kinagian din woy to oyow og-udlingan dan sikaniu.
ngadngad
Koddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan kai to tano, nigkoon ad dio to mgo pagkoonan now woy nig-inum ad. Di kagi to tibo no mgo otow to, ‘Pitawa now to soin no lukos, tungulon sikandin woy palainum sikandin. Woy amigu sikandin to mgo talagkubla to buhis woy dangob no makasasalo.’ Di ka natagaan to Magboboot, nakitaan to malogot naan ka mgo hinimuan din.”
To nakaponga si Hisus to ogbasa, niglulun din on ka nasulatan woy in-uli din on dio to talagbantoy. Nigpinnuu on si Hisus woy tibo no mgo otow nigtotongtong kandin.
gapon
balod
lamisok
Ka otow no konò ogtu-u to bohog to du-on mangayow, ogsagad to maro-ot su ogkabunù sikandin.
takuyan
Ian to sikan ka ig-anad ta no batasan dan su impakita to Magboboot ka pogkohoy-u rin to oyow agad hondoi no otawa, ogkohimu no ogkapangabangan to mgo salo dan.
Sikan ian, mariu-a nu ka goinawa nu to mgo maroot no koiniatan to mgo bato-bato pad. Poomoti nu no oghimu to maroyow woy dakola nu ka pogtuu nu, woy songo dakola nu ka goinawa nu to duma no mgo otow. Woy tuuri nu to oyow ogmaawang do ka goinawa nu to mgo duma nu su sikan ka oghimuon to tibo no mgo otow no ligkat to maawang no goinawa, ogsampit to ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
Tunasan on ka bunduy.
Katibò ogsinogow.
tagwak
No, to noubus on ka tibo no salapi din, noumaan on ka sikan no ugpaan to dakol no bitil no noiluan on kandin to mgo og-awoson din.
tugwak
No nigpataliwaro dan on si Pedro woy si Huan, no pig–insoinso dan sikandan ko, “Hondoi now kua ka kabogbogan no ingkoulii now to soini no napulid? Woy hontow no ngaran ka nigbogoy kaniu to katondanan now?” kagi ran.
Nigtabak ka mgo talagbantoy to, “Waro pad otow no ogpakakagi no unawa ki Hisus.”
Ogpamminog ka karniru ku to kagi ku. Nataga a kandan woy og-unugon a ran.
Sallong ka rò
Mgo sulod, kono ku og-awoson no ogsulat a kaniu tongod ko nokoy no allow woy ko songo monu buwa kalugoy woy oglibong si Hisu Kristu kai to tano.
Ko oghimuan kow to maroot, kono now sulii to songo maroot woy ko duon ogpanungayow kaniu, kono kow ogtabak to songo panungayow. Di ian now isuli ka maroyow woy buyu kow to Magboboot oyow ogkohoy-uan din ka nighimu kaniu to maroot, su sikan ian ka tuud to Magboboot to nig-abin kow rin oyow ogkohoy-uan kow nikandin.
Ka Magboboot no Amoy ku ka pigpuunan to kouyagan woy songo pighimu rin ka Anak din no ogpuunan to kouyagan
Sikan ian to kono kid on oglibonglibong to sikan no malomu ro no ingkaanad kanta an-anayan tongod ki Kristu. Di og-awoson to ogparagas kid on to sikan no pog-anad no ogpokohogot on to pogtuu ta. Ian su tahan now on buwa natagaan to nig-awos on to og-iniugan tad ka mgo hinimuan no warad pulus woy to ogtuu kinow on to Magboboot.
Nig-utusan ni Hisus sikandan to, “Kono now nangoni ka agad hondoi no otow bahin koddi.”
Nò mgo sulod, su dakol ka goinawa now to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu, woy su dakol ka pogparakdakoloy tanow to goinawa ligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot, ogbuyu a kaniu to oyow ogpoomotan now ka pog-ampu now to Magboboot tongod kanak.
Pogkohipanow ni Hisus dio to dalan, mohon-ing ka mgo otow no pakasundul kandin. Woy songo duon dod mgo boi no naninsinogow woy ogmandawot kandin.
Dokad di, to pognangon to Magboboot ki Abraham to sikan no insabut din, waro awosi to duon talagpataliwaro su ka Magboboot do ka nigkagi no si Abraham do ka pignangonan din.
balanak
Diò to balabag.
panoik
hulhul
Du-on otow no nigsugù din ka anakon din to igpa-angoy ka karabaw diò to Aninipot no nigbatili rò ian ka anakon din su nighondiò nasì to Magimun.
amuk
Di nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Hoo, pitow kow to tibo soini no mgo baloy. Malogot ka ignangon ku kaniu no uromo, waro agad sagboka no batu no ogkagalat kai to nasabukan din. Ogkatobal ka tibo.
Du-on otow no ogko-iniat to bogyas. Og-insò to, “Ogko-olog bua to goinawa nu ko ogsaliuan ku to manuk?”
taking
Nigpinnuu si Hisus no mohon-ing ka in-anad din to mgo otow no mgo pananglitan ka impan-anad din. Kagi rin,
Soini ian ka pogkasabuti ku kandan to og-awoon kud on ka mgo salo dan.” Soini ka ingkasulat dongan.
kingking
Ogsugu-on dut otow ka busow.
tukog
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Hontow ka inoy ku? Hontow ka mgo hari ku?”
so-sò
Nò, doromdoma now pa ka sikan no maroyow no nohimu kaniu no nigligkat to sikan no masakit to goinawa now no nakaayun to goinawa to Magboboot. No kuntoon, ogpoomot kow on to oghimu to maroyow. Woy lagboy now ogkoiniatan to oghitagoon a now to waro niglitos to goinawa now ka nighimu to sikan no otow no nakasalo. Ian su maroot now lagboy ka pighimu rin no nahallok kow ko ogpakalagkos kow to iglogpad kandin. Di ian goinawa now ko ogpokogkitakita ki ro. Sikan ian to nig-agpas now ro logpari ka sikan no makasasalo. Nò, mgo sulod, to tibo no nighimu now, impapitow now to waro salo now to sikan no maroot no nighimu to duma now.
bulas
taptap
Ian su, agad hontow no ogsolod to himolayan to Magboboot, songo ogpakahagtong on to kandin no oghimuon no ogkoiling dod to Magboboot no nighimoloy on to kandin no poghimu.
ogpakasalangan on ka sikan no suguanon to ig-uli to igbuyag din no ogkatokawan no subla ka poglogpad to sika maroot no suguonon no igparuma to mgo otow no kono ogbabali to kagi to Magboboot no dio ogdoog to imperno.”
Ogtokoron now no ubaton sikandan pinabayo to hinimuan dan. Pananglitan, ka bogas to kayu no ogkakoon no oghingaranan to igira, kono ta man ogkapupu dio to banag woy kono ta ogkapupu ka bogas to ubas no songo ogkakoon dio to sapinit
Ka sabandal no otow ungod ogsasow to duma rin no lagboy no masamuksamuk no otow.
no nigdampo ni Hisus ka boi no inogo on no natul-id on ka poka rin, no nigsayo din on ka Magboboot.
Ka bagakis, holon no ogsapiron no bulbul to kuddò no ogpaniukan no bali-og.
bansag
Lagboy igka-aras su naan din no warò ogpakabulig to oghimu to pinayag. Koddì on ka nakapangabang.
pa
warò
gopas
salupung
Tago-od dò nig-ugpò
Ko dii ka nigligkat to tanò no oggoram ka to masakit no oglagbas, nalimuan ka to busow.
Ko du-on tanò no ogkalunow, ogkalopang ka kayu.
Nò, nig-inso ni Pilatu, “Kona a nu ogtabakon? Waro ka buwa mataga to duon katondanan ku to ogpalibuwas koykow woy to ogpalansang koykow dio to krus?”
ko-on
Igpaalap ku sikoykow, Timoteo, no ogkounawa ka to lagboy no anak ku to pogtuu ki Hisus. Ogbuyu a to Magboboot no Amoy ta woy si Hisu Kristu no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta oyow ogbuligan woy ogkohoy-uan ka woy to oyow ogbogayan ka ran to maawang no goinawa now.
Waro nu karagoi ka mgo ayam no oghimatayan woy ogtutungon no igpanubad, woy ko duon duma no igbogoy no ogpaawo poron to mgo salo.
Nò, ogkounawa rod kaniu. Su lagboy kow ogkoiniat to duon mgo kabogbogan now no igkabogoy to Gimukud to Magboboot, tuuri now to oyow ogkohogot ka pogtuu to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus.
otow
sogod
tugu
lanos
Ampow ta ka ilawan.
Nakadugnal koy na-an su ogko-on kow.
Agad pad, ogdoromdomon ta ko ogmonuon ta to ogmoos-osonoy oyow ogparakdakoloy ki to goinawa ta woy ogmabulbuligoy kinow.
Si Hisus, ka oghingaranan to Maroyow woy ka Matuwarong su waro batasan din no maroot. Di nigligalan now ro sikandin woy nigbuyu kow ki Pilatu oyow ian din igpalibuwas ka talagbunu no tahan on no napirisu.
Sikan ian to ogkabonnalan sikandin no ogkalogparan su ligkat to sikan no mgo maroot no nighimu rin. No ko songo monu ka imbayadbayad din to duma no mgo otow, songo sikan dod ka igbayadbayad dio to kandin. Di ko songo monu kabuluti ka inumanon no impoinum din to duma no mgo otow, ogdangob pad man do to kabuluti ka igkabaybayari no ogpakabalos dio to kandin
bagunbun
Du-on kabogbogan to igbuyag to lunsud su ogpakasugù sikandin.
ogtubù
Kagi to datù to, “Tongod to utang to taga Kapugi, warò labot to Maambago ka sikan no utang.
Nò, sikoddi ka Kakoy to Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan no igpakita ku kaniu to duon katondanan ku to ogpasaylu to salo to mgo otow. Nò, nigkagian din ka sika nigkolog to lawa, ‘Usi, ka kagi ku koykow, onow kad, paragas ka ogsasindog honata nu ka ikam nu woy og-uli kad on.’ ”
Ogpakuru-kurù ka otow no ogsilib to usig din.
No nighondio ka diwata to Nasarit su duon igpanangon to Magboboot dio to sagboka no dalaga no ogpangasawoon to lukos no ngaran din si Husi. Si Husi ka pinanganak ni Dabid no songo labow no igbuyag dan dongan. Ka ngaran to sika boi, si Maria.
Ian ta igbanus to tabla oyow ogmalanang ka nighimu no banus no napu-un to balakayu.
Ian su ko nouyag on ka namatoy, ogkounawa sikandan to mgo suguanon to Magboboot dio to langit no kono ogpokog-asawa ka boi woy lukos.
Di tagood to soini pad ka lawa ta kai to tano, ogpakaalooy ki su ligkat to kono ki pad ogpokohonat to mgo igkohirapi ta. Kono no goinawa ta to ogkoongkoran ka soini no lawa ta no ogkamatoy, di ian ta ogkoiniatan oyow ogkabogayan kinow on to sikan no igliwan no iam no lawa no konad on ogkamatoy.
Marani dio, duon mohon-ing no mgo babuy no ogpamukal.
Ka lukos, kono din ogtorongan ka ulu rin ko og-ampu su sikandin ka nakaalap to katondanan woy ka karoyawon no nigligkat to Magboboot. Di ka boi, ogtotorong su ian igpatokod to asawa rin.
Ian goinawa ku porom no dio a pa to longod now su oyow ogmaal-alukuyoy ki oyow ogkabalbalawan do ka goinawa ku. Ian su kuntoon, dakol ka igkasasow ku kaniu.
tu-id
Butud
To dio si Hisus to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu, nigkita rin ka mgo datu no mgo otow no ogpanagu dio to sabukanan to salapi ka igbogoy ran dio to simbaanan,
Alang-alang pad ka pogkohinug din.
Pigpouli ni Hisus ka mgo otow no nigpaawoy-awoy sikandin do dio to songo malopot no bubungan oyow og-ampu dio to Magboboot.
Nanhalin on diò to Maambago su nighimu to iam no landingan.
Pogkapawo, nighipanow on si Hisus dio to waro otow. Di ka mgo otow, namangho ki Hisus no nanhondio kandin, no kono dan porom igbogoy to og-awo si Hisus dio to kandan no ugpaan,
Pogkaponga, kagi ni Hisus kandan, “To kai a pad to kaniu, impanoy ku man inangon kaniu to awos to ogkatuman ka tibo no ingkasulat to Balaod ni Moisis dongan bahin koddi lagkos to ingkasulat dongan to duma no mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, lagkos to tibo no ingkasulat ni Dabid dio to sinulat no Mga Salmo.”
Di nataga a to agad nokoy no ogbuyuon nu dio to Magboboot, ogbogayan ka.”
Tibo no mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot woy ka Balaod ni Moisis, taman to nokouma si Huan, nignangonan dan bahin to Pogsugu to Magboboot.
pintik
Ian to natagaan kud su ganna ro to marusilom, ka Magboboot no ian tagtuun kanak woy ka ogsimboon ku, nigsugu to diwata din no dio mogsasindog to longod ku.
lalung
mundu-an
halin
lawian
Pogpitow ku no duon nigkita ku no malunsi-lunsi no kuddo. Ian ngaran to nigpanguddo, si Kamatayon. No duon nigsundul kandin no oghingaranan to Ugpaan to mgo Nammatoy. Nigbogayan sikandan to katondanan to ogpanhimatoy to igkohop-at no baad to tibo no mgo otow kai to kalibutan. No ian ka ogpakamatoy kandan, ka mgo samuk, woy mgo ka bitil, woy ka mgo dalu, woy ka mgo mabulut no mgo ulod-ulod no magintalunan.
Kono kow ogkahallok to duon igkabaybayari no magaan ogpokouma kaniu. Duon mgo duma now no igpapirisu ni Satanas oyow ogkool-ologan din ka pogtuu now kanak. No ogkabaybayaran kow to sampulu no allow. Di agad ko igkamatoy now ka igkabaybayari now, kono now lokoi ka pogtuu now kanak no ogbogayan ku sikaniu to pogkouyag now no waro katamanan no ian ka igsayo ku kaniu.
Waro otow no waro goinawa to kandin no unoy no lawa. Dokad di to og-ungod din ogtantanuri woy ogkannugunan din. Ka sikan, ogkounawa ki Kristu no ogtanudtanud kanta no ogtuu kandin.
Ka bilisbilis, ligkat to salagapun no ogpanulu-tulù.
Igtampod ta to kayu ka mo-irob
so-sò
Obay, dakol’n bubun nu?
Sunud no tu-id. or Igsunud no tu-id.
No ko dio a to kaniu, noupul a no nigkolkolon so diralom ku su nahallok a ko kono a ogpakatuman to igpohimu to Magboboot kanak.
Sikan ka igmalogot to maroyow ka pogboot to Magboboot no ogkohimu kinow on no litos to ogpakalagkos kinow to pogsugu din su ian to ogkabaybayaran kinow
Ko-utunan to inoy ka batò.
Pogpitow ku to sagboka no ulu to sikan no magintalunan, no duon dakol no banos to napalian no ogkoiling to ogpakimatoy no pali, dokad di to noulian on. No ka tibo no mgo otow kai to kalibutan, nabolongbolong no nigpasakup on to sikan no magintalunan.
galat
Nigtabak ka mgo Hudiu to, “Duon kanami no sugu to Balaod noy. Ko ogpaagad-agad koy to sikan no sugu, ogpohimatayan sikandin su nignangon sikandin to kandin kun ka Anak to Magboboot.”
bakukang
Sagpit kow pad woy inum kow.
Sikan ka kagi ni Hirodis su sikandin ian ka nigparakop ki Huan no nigpabanggutan sikandin dio to pirisuan su duon goinawa ni Hirodis ki Hirodias no asawa to hari rin no si Pilipi. Nò, nig-asawa on ni Hirodis ka sika ipag din.
Og-unugon ta ka lawa to otow. Og-opus-opuson ta to ogpitow.
Ian ogkounawaan ka igpatulin to paan no in-amut to boi to dakol no harina. Pogkaponga rin, ogtulin ka tibo.”
Nigparagas to kagi to diwata to, “Ian do ogpakasabut to soini ka otow no mougsob ka pogdoromdom din. Ka kalitukan to sikan no papitu no ulu to sikan no magintalunon, ian ka papitu no bubungan no nigpinpinnuuan to boi no maroot. Woy ogkalituk dod to papitu no mgo igbuyag.
sumpil
boli
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to, “Wow mgo amigu ku, soini ka ignangon ku kaniu: kono kow ogkahallok to mgo otow no oghimatoy kaniu su ka lawa ta ro ka ogkohimatayan dan no warad on igkohimu ran,
angga-an
Nò, nigduma ni Hudas ka mohon-ing no sundalu no taga Ruma woy duma no mgo talagbantoy to sika Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu. Ka mgo igbuyag to talagpanubad woy ka mgo Parisiu ka pigsugu to mgo talagbantoy. Tibo sikandan, nig-alap dan ka mgo ilawan dan woy ka mgo pupud, mgo moirob mgo kayu no panagana iglampos dan. Nanhondio to sikan no pinamula no kayu.
Ka sikan, nig-unug kow pad to mgo maroot no batasan to mgo otow to soini no kalibutan. Woy nakapaagad-agad kow pad ki Satanas no ian igbuyag to mgo busow no ogman-ugpo dio to aw-awangan. Sikandin dod ka ogboboot to mgo otow no kono ogpaagad-agad to Magboboot.
Du-on otow no ogbasbason din ka asu rin to ogpammuod to babuy no magintalunan.
Kuntoon ka allow to ogbobootan ka tibo no mgo koot-otawan kai to soin no kalibutan. Kuntoon, ogkaroog ka igbuyag to soin no kalibutan no si Satanas.
sangkag
os-os
pulikay
buyokung
Kasukul kid to songo saku
kotu-kotù
Du-on kuddò ku no du-on ogtu-ud no ogboli porom, di konò ku igbogoy su ogkannugunan ku to ogduad ka kuddò ku
Sikan ian to mananoy a makatood no oghondio kaniu su malasi a mabalabagi to soini no oghimuon ku.
Lo-in ka pasa-it sikan su nabobo-otan on sikandin.
di-ok
Duon lawa to mgo og-ugpo dio to langit woy songo duon loin no lawa to mgo og-ugpo kai to soini no kalibutan. Ka tibo, nabogayan to karoyawi ran, di loin ka karoyawi to sikan no og-ugpo dio to langit, woy songo loin man do ka karoyawi to sikan no og-ugpo kai to soini no kalibutan.
Ka otow no og-agud, og-ayunan din ka batò to bolad din  di moimung dò to og-usung.
Nigtabak sikandan, “Lalima ro no malison no paan woy darua ro no ngalap to woig ka duon kai to kanami.”
angat
Og-agpas a oghondiò to Valencia su ogkausiloman a.
Ko-upul, upulon ki to mangayow ko tatolu ko’ghingutu kanta.
Ka otow, og-udling to anak din to maroyow no batasan
bak
angkuan
Ko du-on otow no oghipanow no ogdabokdabok, ma-agbot ka pogdi-okdi-ok din no ogkapukow ki.
kawò
Ko nighondii si Hisus to tano, nignangonnangon kanta to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod to ogkohimu no ogkabogayan kinow on to maawang no goinawa oyow sikaniu no kono no Hudiu no namariu to Magboboot woy sikanami no Hudiu no nigmarani kandin, ogkasagboka kinow on dio to kandin.
at-at
manta
No, ogligkat to kandin no dakol no kohoy-u kanta, waro ogtamanan to igpulusi din kanta tibo.
No su nataga a to sikan, songo nataga a to kono a pad ogkamatoy di ogpokougpo a pad kai to tano oyow ogkaanad ku pad sikaniu oyow ogdakol pad ka pogtuu now ki Hisu Kristu oyow ogkatimulan pad ka igkarago now no ogligkat to pogtuu now.
Undui nu ka sinugba
Mgo sulod, tu-tuu ian ka tibo no igsulat ku kaniu no nataga ka Magboboot to kono no ubat.
Ogkounawa ka innangon ni Huan no Talagbautismu to sagboka no ilawan no naparokatan on no ogmalayag. Ko pila ro no bulan, narago kow to sikan no igbat-ow to dalan now dio to Magboboot”
tanok
“Maistru,” kagi rin, “Nokoy ka dakoldakol no sugu to tibo no insugu to Magboboot ki Moisis?”
gotok
hanow
Ogbuyu a to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu.
Sikan ian to ogbohog a kaniu to oyow ogngilam kow woy ogdoromdomon now ka soini no tatolu no tuid ku kai to kaniu, to maallow woy ko marusilom, malasi a ogpanluwoi ka nig–anad a kaniu.
uwang
sulon
Mohon-ing ka mgo otow no nigpuun dio to dakol no lunsud to Hirusalim woy tibo no mgo lunsud to probinsia to Hudia no nanhondio nigpamminog ki Huan. Songo duon mohon-ing no mgo otow no nighondio no nigpuun to mgo lunsud no marani to woig to Hordan.
Ligkat to pogwali ni Huan to mgo otow bahin to kagi to Magboboot taman to kuntoon, ogpoomot ka mgo otow no og-agow to katondanan to Pogsugu to Magboboot.
Pogkaponga dan to nighantak, nigpinnuu sikandan no nigbantoy ro kandin.
Ka anak to laku woy ka singgalung, itù dod ka ngaran to anak.
Pogdatong ni Agabu kanami, nighokad din ka manggad no inholon ni Pablo no imbanggut din to kandin lagboy no bolad pinoglagkos to paa rin. Kagi ni Agabu to, “Kagi to Gimukud to Magboboot to, ‘Sikoykow, Pablo no tagtuun to soini no manggad, ogkounawa kad ogkabangguti to mgo Hudiu no dio to Hirusalim. Igbogoy ran sikoykow dio to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu oyow ogkoogotan ka.’ ”
sabul
bitu-on
Ian kow og-iling to ‘Hoo’ woy ko ‘Kono,’ su agad nokoy ka ignangon nu no malogoton now porom to innangon now, ligkat sikan ki Satanas no igbuyag to mgo busow,” kagi ni Hisus.
Kò nu og-ol-ologi ka inoy nu su maro-ot.
bangkawan
No kagi ni Hisus, “Soini ka ignangon ku kaniu. Ka igkaratu now dini to tano, ian ka igpakabulig now to duma no mgo otow dini to tano oyow uromo ko warad on ka soini no igkaratu nu no ogkapurut now dini to tano, ogtinawoon kow to Magboboot dio to ugpaanan no waro katamanan dio to langit.
kalamkalam
Di og-awoson lagboy no ogkataga kinow to waro otow no ogpakasabut to sikan no Tahan no Kasulatan no kinagian to Magboboot ko kono ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot no ogpasabut kandin.
Tag sagboka kaniu, ko duon talinga now, og-awoson now to ogpamminog kow to soini no ignangon to Gimukud to Magboboot dio to mgo nigtuu. Kagi rin to, ‘Ka otow no kono ogparoog ki Satanas, kono ogkalogparan to oghingaranan to igkaruwa no kamatayon.’ ”
Sikan ian to naaras–aras on ka mgo taga Tisalunika woy ka mgo igbuyag dan,
Pogkita to mgo hibatoon ni Hisus to tuud to mgo otow kandin, nig-inso to, “Buyag, litos ko ogtigbason noy ka sikan no mgo otow?”
Nigkagi man do si Hisus to, “Omunaan ko duon talag-anad to Balaod no ogpasakup to Pogsugu to Magboboot, ogkounawa sikandin to datu no duon dio to bodiga rin ka dakol no kalaglagan no iglibuwas din ka tahan woy iam no kasangkapan din oyow ogkagamit.”
kuoping
Songo allow to nigdatong woy si Hisus dio to doipag to lanow, dio to lunsud to Gadara, natagbu ran dio to dalan ka darua no otow no pigbusawan no dio nigpuun to mgo pilang no lobonganan. Mabulut lagboy sikandan, omunaan no waro ogpakabayo no mgo otow dio.
Ogpatokawan on no warò ogpakapangabang.
Du-on otow no nokogpikitpikit ka saosow rin
tulaang
tilaa
Woy duon igkararuwa no diwata to Magboboot no nigsundul to sikan no nokohun-a no diwata, no nigkagi to, “Nagulak on. Nagulak on ian lagboy ka mabantug no lunsud no ogkohingaranan to Babilunia. Ian su ka mgo nan-ugpo to sikan no lunsud, nig-ayat dan ka tibo no mgo otow kai to kalibutan to ogmanhimu to maroot. No ian dan ogkounawaan ka boi no maroot so batasan no ogpoinumon to mgo lukos to mabulut no inumanon to oyow ogkaayat din to oghilabot kandin.”
kalaykay
Woy duon dod ignangon ku kaniu,” kagi, “ko darua kow kai to soin no kalibutan no og-uyun to ogbuyuon now ko og-ampu kow dio to Amoy ku dio to langit, ogkatuman do.
Niglingi si Hisus no nigkita rin sikandan no ogluyud. Kagi rin kuwo kandan, “Nokoy ka ogkuon now?” Nigtabak no nig-inso to, “Hondoi ka og-ugpo, Rabai?” Ka lituk to Rabai, ‘Maistru.’
Kagi to anggam ku, "Ogngilam ki su gawoy rin so-ini."
Nokogsabut ka sikan [no darua].
To nokouma on si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din dio to lunsud to Kapirnaum, nigdani ki Pedro ka mgo talagkubla to buhis to Dakol no Ampuanan no nig-insaan dan si Pedro to, “Ogbayad ka igbuyag now to buhis to Dakol no Ampuanan?”
Nigsundul ki Hisus ka mohon-ing lagboy no mgo otow su nigkita ran ka pighimu rin no inkoinuinu ran ko nigbawian din ka mgo nandaralu.
sorò
Nigkagi man do sikandin to, “Sulati nu ka suguanon to Magboboot no ogtanudtanud to mgo nigtuu no dio to Ipisu. No soini ka igsulat nu, “Ka soini no ignangon ku, nigligkat kanak no oggongon to sikan no papitu no mgo bituon kai to kawanan no bolad ku. Woy sikanak dod ka oghihipanow dio to taliwaro to sikan no papitu no bulawan no sabukanan to mgo ilawan.
kopig
Ian su, ko nig-abin ki to Magboboot, noiniat sikandin to oyow ogmaroyow tibo ka batasan ta. Kono din ogkoiniat ko ogmaroot do ka mgo batasan ta.
Naan bag to mgo batò no kuddò ka ogsakayan dan.
Ogkarago ka to dakol no igkarago nu duma to mohon-ing no mgo otow no songo ogkarago ko ogkootow si Huan
so
hapun
Nigpakimatoy si Hisus kanta no mgo makasasalo, oyow ogkaawo on ka maroot no nakabanggut to goinawa ta no nigligkat to mgo maroot no ogpakaayat kanta to pog-ugpo ta kuntoon kai to soini no kalibutan. Ian su sikan ka imboot to Magboboot no ian Amoy ta.
Ogdungdung ka kayu no marani to woig. Ogkalusuk ka u-ud to kayu.
palayud
Kuntoon, mgo sulod, duon ignangon noy kaniu tongod to poglibong to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu kai to tano woy tongod to poglimudlimud ta oyow ogpakatagbu kinow kandin.
No ka sikan no mgo otow no nigpaap–apuloy ki Istiban, namangho sikandan to mgo otow no og-uubat to nigdinog kun to kagi ni Istiban no pigdoot din ka kaap–apuan dan no si Moisis, woy songo pigdoot din kun ka Magboboot.
agpas
Konò ki ogpakapogos ka batò ko konò ogpa-agad-agad.
paloy
Unawa ka nanam su maporos.
Nig-inso ni Hisus kandin, “Pilipi, nalugoy ad kai to kaniu no wara a now pad matagoi? Sikan no otow no nigkita koddi songo nakakita to Magboboot no Amoy ku. Manio to sikan pad atag ka kagi nu to, ‘Ipapitow nu ka Amoy nu?’ ”
Ka batò no ogka-ang-angga-an, ogkulang to pogko-on, sabinit, pogparigus woy warò baloy no ogko-ugpa-an dan.
Ka pala-os og-ugpò to pulalas
Songo ogkounawa to iam no inumanon, kono ta igtagu dut tahan no taguanan no nohimu to laplap to ayam su ko ogtulin on ka inumanon, ogbotu ka sikan no taguanan no ogkaraat ka inumanon woy songo ogkaraat ka taguanan. Awoson no itagu ka iam no inumanon dut songo iam no taguanan no nohimu to laplap to ayam oyow kono ogkaraat ka inumanon woy ka taguanan.”
Sikan ian to waro agad sagboka kandan no ogkohirapan, su ka duma no mgo otow no nigtuu, no duon tano dan woy ko baloy, ogduwaron dan. No ko nokoy ka imbayad, nig–alap dan dio to mgo suguanon ni Hisus,
Ligkat dod to pogtuu rin, nig-ongkoran din ka ugpaan din dio to Ehipto no waro nahallok din to igkabolu to sikan no Igbuyag to Ehipto. Nig-aguanta ni Moisis ka kohirapan rin su nounawa to nigkita rin ka Magboboot no kono ogkakita.
Duon mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy ka mgo Parisiu no kagi to goinawa ran to, “Hontow otawa soini no ogboboot do duon? Nigsumpalitan din ka Magboboot su hontow naan ka ogpakapasaylu to salo? Ka Magboboot do ka ogpakapasaylu to salo,” kagi to soin no mgo talag-anad.
No nigkagian ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din to, “Sikan ian no ognangonan ku sikaniu to kono kow ogkasasow to igkouyag now ko nokoy ka koonon now. Songo kono now ogkasasawi ka lawa now ko nokoy ka ogkinaboon now,
kalan
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi din, “Malogot ka innangon nu di songo duon insulat no kagi to Magboboot to, ‘Kono now ol-ologi ka Lagboy no Igbuyag no ian ka Magboboot.’ ”
Waro do malugoy no nigtapid noy on ka kalaglagan noy no nighipanow koy on no oghondio to Hirusalim.
Ka otow no nighimu to baloy rin, og-omotan din to oghiponga ka oghimu su ugpa-an din on.
kuò
Pogpitow ku man do no nigkita ku ka Nati no Karniru no nigsasindog dio to bubungan no oghingaranan to Sion. No dio to longod din, duon 144,000 no mgo otow. No ka mgo bukod dan, nasulatan to ngaran to Nati no Karniru woy ka ngaran to Amoy rin.
Nò, nighondio sikandin to nganga to lama. Duon man do dangob no binulan no boi no nigkita kandin. Nignangon sikandin to mgo lukos dio to, “Soini no otow, duma ni Hisus no matig Nasarit.”
Sikanak, ian ku ogkounawaan ka otow no nigpamula. No si Apulus, ian din ogkounawaan ka otow no ogpambus-ug to woig dio to pinamula. Di ka Magboboot atag ka nigpatulin to sikan no pinamula.
al-al
saa
dungalas
Kono tad og-ampuan ka mgo inotow-otow no ogkounawa to sikan no batasan to pila buwa kandan su duon impasulat to Magboboot dongan. Kagi, “Naminpinnuu ka mgo otow no og-inum woy to ogkoon to sikan no ingkatubad dan to mgo inotow-otow. No, pogkaponga, nigmanasasindog on no nigmanasayow on.” Sikan ka ingkasulat.
bokog
timusug
Agad ko duon igbuyu ta to Magboboot di kono ki rod ogkabogayan su maroot so tuud ta su ian ta ro poron ogbulungon ka kanta ro no ogkoibogan.
libak
Impohitaga ni Hisus ka dakol no goinawa rin kanta su imbogoy rin to oghimatayan ka lawa rin no igpangabang kanta. Ligkat to sikan, ogkatagaan ta ko songo monu ka igdakoli ta to duma ta su og-awoson to songo igkabalagad ta ka kanta no lawa no igkohoy-u ta kandan.
Ka otow no ugaton, ogkito-on ka ugat to bolad din su oggatow on
No nigkagi man do ka igbuyag kuwo to suguanon din to, ‘Hondio ka man do to mgo duma no mgo dalan, woy dio to mgo hilit, mgo kamot no ogpamangho kow to mgo otow woy pogosa now sikandan no oyow ogpokohondini on to baloy ku oyow ogkaponu on.
Wà nu tigpos ka kaaglagan nu.
Ko malugoy ka og-anak, ogkagi to, “To! Ogloganan ka.”
likoy
panalapì
lagas
subong
sising
lakilas
daragunut
Agad hontow ka ogbayò dò du-on to landingan.
banulaloy
Ogdoromdom pad si Satanas ko nokoy pad ka igtogkad man dò ki Hisus.
tigda-an
Ko du-on ogsisigupan, ko ogko-opus [ka sigariliu] no ogkatutung, ogkaragdag ka alibu rin.
Pogkaponga to nig–onow si Saulo no poghimata rin, konad ogkita. Sikan ian to nigkitkit dan sikandin dio to lunsud to Damasku.
Nabarut ka pangamuton no nagangu diò to pantad no naligot ka na-alap diò to ampow.
Nigtabak si Pedro no kagi rin, “Ka dangob no mgo otow man.” Kagi ni Hisus to, “Nò, ko sikan ian naan, ka mgo anak to mgo datu ka kono ogbayad to buhis.
dayun
Pananglitan. Ka mgo kuddo, ogbukaruwan ta oyow ko ogkakolong ta ka bukaru, ogpakapaagad-agad kanta ko hondoi ta ogparologa ka lawa ran.
Nigtabak ka nabawian. Kagi rin, “Sikan no lukos no ngaran din si Hisus, nighimu rin ka basak no ian din impoid to mata ku. Nò, nigsugu a rin to oghondio to sikan no woig no oghingaranan to Siloam woy to ogpandop-ug a dio. Nò, nigpaagad-agad a no oghondio no nigpandop-ug ad no nakakita ad on.”
Nò, mgo sulod. Pamminog kow sikaniu no ogkagi to, “Ko hondoi no allow, oghipanow koy no oghondio to songo lunsud su dio koy pad og-ugpo to songo tuid no ogduruwad koy oyow ogdakol ka dinuad noy.”
Di nigtabak a to, ‘Kono a Buyag, su waro a makakoon to agad nokoy no ogpakaligsom kanami woy ka inkono to Balaod noy no kono koy ogpakakoon no mgo Hudiu.’
Imbogoy rin kaniu sikanak no si Pablo, si Apulus, woy si Pedro, no mgo talag-anad kaniu. Woy imbogoy rin dod ka soini no tano, woy ka goinawa ta, woy ka kamatayon ta woy ka tibo no ogkabayaan ta uromo lagkos ka kuntoon no ogkabayaan ta. Tibo din imbogoy kaniu oyow duon pulus now.
Wa do malugoy no nighondio si Hisus to bubungan su oyow og-ampu, no songo karusiloman ian ka pog-ampu din dio to Magboboot.
tuma
Sikan ian, ka otow no duon kabogbogan oyow ogpakakagi to loinloin no mgo kinagian, maroyow ko ogbuyu to Magboboot oyow songo ogbogayan sikandin to kabogbogan to oglituk to sikan no mgo kinagian.
Ko duon talinga now, panalinga kow.”
dumurow
haw-on
tulan
No to poglibuwas on sikandan to sikan no lunsud, nigtopungan dan ka obol to tano duon to paa ran no igpasabut dan to ogbalagaron dan on ka mgo taga Antiokia no waro nigtuu. No nigparagas nighipanow sikandan no oghondio to lunsud to Ikuniu.
Songo waro now buwa doromdoma ka sika papitu no malison no paan no nangoon ka hop-at no libu no mgo otow? Pila no mgo bukag ka naponu to nasamo?”
sugut
duliak
Di kono ogpakabayad soini no suguanon to utang din dio to igbuyag din. Omunaan no nigsugu ka sikan no datu to igbaligya sikandin tagkos to asawa rin woy ka mgo anak din woy songo igbaligya ka tibo no mgo kalaglagan din su oyow ogkabayaran ka utang din.
bandog
pokù
Nigpangabangan kinow rin no nig-awo ki rin to katondanan ni Satanas no duon to karusiloman. No nighalin ki rin dio to katondanan to Anak din no si Hisus no indakoli rin to goinawa.
Ka igtambag ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “ko nigtugunan kow to pagkoonan, an-anayan, dio kow pad ogpinnuu to kono no mabantug. No ko ogkitoon kad to mang-asawa, ogdalapak koykow no ogkagian kad on to, ‘Sulod, dini ka to ampow; soini ka pinnuuan no madmaroyow,’ no ogkatahud ka dio to tangkaan to sikan no mgo otow.
To ogkapawo-pawo, nighipanow si Hisus to laplap to woig no oghondio to kandan.
Songo nigkagi si Hisus kandan to, “Ko ogpokouma kow to dakol no lunsud woy ko agad doisok no lunsud, pamitawa now ka otow no ogpalopow kaniu dio to baloy rin. Lopow kow dio to baloy rin woy palinggalat kow dutun taman to oghipanow kow on.
Ka sikan no otow, ogligliga-an to poghilamon din; konò din amana og-apuroon.
Di,” kagi ni Hisus, “ka mgo otow no natagam on to tahan no inumanon, konad ogkoiniat to iam no inumanon su kagi ran, ‘Maroyow ka tahan.’ ”
wakwak
mula
su ka ignangonnangon now tongod to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, nokouma dio to agad hondoi no ugpaan, kono do no dio do to Masidonia woy ko dio do to Girisia. Sikan ian, kono og-awoson ko sikanami ka ognangonnangon tongod to pogtuu now to Magboboot
To sampulu woy darua ka tuid ni Hisus, nigduma ran sikandin no nighondio to Hirusalim to sikan no pagkoonan to mgo Hudiu tongod to batasan dan.
Ogpokodo-ig ka hapuy to dakol no kayu. Woy ogkaparong ko ogko-opus on ka kayu.
Ian no igkasinogow su oggutasan ka hari din.
kasilòn
hogod
dalu
Ian to sikan ka ig–udling ta kandan su duon mgo baloy no anaranan to mgo Hudiu no natahan nakalogob dio to sikan no mgo lunsud dan. No to tibo no Allow to Oghimoloy, ogkabasa woy ignangonnangon on ka sikan no Balaod ni Moisis,” kagi ni Santiago.
Omunaan no ka patalaasawa konad on no darua no otow di ogkounawa to sagboka ro no otow sikandan. Sikan ian no kono no ogkaayun to ogpitason to otow ka pigsagboka to Magboboot.”
Di kono ogkohimu ko og-abin koy no sikanami ka nigligkatan to agad nokoy no maroyow no nohimu dio to kaniu. Ian su ka kanokali noy woy ka mgo katagaanan noy, ogligkat atag to Magboboot.
Ka otow no kono ogtu-u to bohog to du-on mangayow, ogsagad to maro-ot su ogkabunu sikandin.
Nokoy so-ini no otow no lukuluku? Mulò dò no og-alakansion ki.
limulan
bayò
hilow
bungul
dal-oy
sa-it
dula
Pogkaponga ni Hisus to pog-ampu din, nigsasindog on woy nighondio to mgo hibatoon din, di nigkita ni Hisus to nohirogo on sikandan su ian dan igkohirogo su malotoy so goinawa ran su ogmasakit on ian.
Ko ungod ta ogdoromdomon ka sikan no ogpakaayat kanta to maroot no oghimuon ta ro duon, ogpakasalo kid on. Ko ogliblibongan ta ka sikan no salo, ian ta ogkoumaan ka kamatayon ta.
Ko du-on ka otow no ogkabigtawan su ligkat to nigdaralu, og-alimongawan ta. Oghiupon ta ka talinga woy ko konò pad oggoram, ogkagaton ta ka tindi-isok din oyow ogko-ulì ka goinawa rin ka nabigtawan.
kikim
Ka mgo otow no matuwarong dio to Magboboot, oglayag no ogkounawa to allow ko rio sikandan to Pandatuan to Magboboot uromo. Ko duon talinga now, pamminog kow,” kagi ni Hisus to mgo otow.
tarangk su
Ian su og-awoson to si Hisu Kristu ka og-alap to katondanan to pogsugu taman to ogkaroog din on ka tibo no mgo usig din.
pugut
Nò, ka mgo pogbuyagon to mgo Hudiu, pogdinog dan to sikan no intabak ni Istiban, nigkakagot ka ngipon dan su lagboy on ian no nabolu kandin.
tamà
mantiku
Ka mgo otow no kono ogparoog ki Satanas, ogbogayan ku sikandan to oyow ogpakalongod kanak to ogpinpinnuu uromo su oyow ogpakabulig kanak to pogboboot ku. No ka sikan, ogkounawa rod kanak no nakaroog a ki Satanas, no songo ogpokoglongod a to Amoy ku no ogpinpinnuu no ogpakabulig a kandin to pogboboot din.
bunag
gopas
kutu to pala-os
Dongan, nignangon ka Magboboot ki Abraham, tongod kandin woy tongod dod to mgo pinanganak din to uromo, sikandan on ka ogpakasugu to tibo no mgo otow kai to soini no kalibutan. Di ka soini no innangon to Magboboot no igbogoy rin kandan uromo, kono ogligkat to pogtuman ni Abraham to Balaod su ligkat atag to pogtuu rin to innangon to Magboboot kandin. No su nigtuu on si Abraham, nighingaranan on to Magboboot sikandin to maroyow dio to tangkaan din.
Ian su dongan to poghimu to Magboboot to soini no kalibutan no marusilom pad tibo, nigkagi sikandin oyow ogkaawo ka marusilom no sikan do ian no nigmaawang on. No sikandin dod ka ogbat-ow to goinawa ta oyow ogpakasabut ki to duon kabogbogan din no ogkakitaan ta dio ki Hisu Kristu.
Ko moon-ing ka igkasasaw ta, ogsokol so goinawa ta.
atu
Ogkounawa rod kanta su ko kai ki pad to soini no kalibutan, ogkaalang-alang pad ka pogkasabuti ta to Magboboot. No ian ogkounawaan ka alung to ispiu no putow su kono ta amana ogkamolmologan ka ogkitoon ta. Kuntoon, ogpakasabut ki to malintok tongod kandin. Di uromo no ogpakatangko kid on kandin, ogpakasabut kid on to tibo, no ogkounawa ro to kuntoon no ogkatagaan to Magboboot ka tibo no goinawa ta.
lituk
Nò, sikan ian to ogkagawayan on ka tibo no mgo koot-otawan to soini no kalibutan su ogbogayan sikandin to ogmanhimu to sikan no mgo kabolbolonganan duon to tangkaan to sikan no nokohun-a no magintalunan. Pogkaponga, ka igkaruwa no magintalunan, ogsugu to mgo otow to oyow oghimu to inotow-otow no ogkoiling to sikan no nokohun-a no magintalunan no duon dakol no pali no ogpakimatoy poron di nouyag do.
Du-on ka warò ku masabuti no nig-insà a ko nokoy ka lituk.
bulung
bali-og
Woy ko ogpamuyu sikandan to isda, songo kono now igbogoy kandan to ulod no ogpokohilu.
Nò, nigpallaguy no nighondio ki Simon Pedro woy ka sikan no dangob no hibatoon no duon dakol no goinawa ni Hisus kandin. Nignangonan sikandan to, “Nigkuo dan ka lawa ni Hisus to pigsabalan dan. Wa ki mataga ko hondoi ran isabuk.”
Nò, nanlibuwas ka mgo Parisiu to sikan no anaranan no nigbabantaan ko ogmonuon dan to ogpohimatoy ki Hisus.
dugi
bukugn
No pogdinog to mgo otow to sikan no innangon ni Pedro, lagboy nasugat ka goinawa ran. No kagi ran to, “Mgo sulod, ogmomonu koy on naan?”
tagalilung
To nakaponga nigkagi si Hisus nigkamoy rin ka nalibulung no mgo otow no ko nigmarani on kandin, kagi rin kandan to, “Pamminog kow,” kagi din, “oyow ogpakasabut kow to ignangon ku kaniu.
Ko nigligad on ka hon-om no allow, nigduma ni Hisus si Pedro, si Santiago, woy si Huan do no nigtakarog kandan to songo matikang no bubungan no waro loin no duma ran. Ko nokouma on, nahalin ka langlangawan ni Hisus
Ka sikan no nighimu to Magboboot, nighimu rin to oyow ogkohimu no ogpaagad-agad kinow on to sikan no maroyow no mgo batasan no ingkasulat to dongan no Balaod din. No ian to ogpakatood ki no ogpaagad-agad to sikan su ogbuligan ki to Gimukud to Magboboot no kono tad on og-awoson no ogpaagad-agad ki to mgo maroot no koiniatan to soini no lawa ta.
babuyon
kalugun
hagamhagam
Nig-anad ni Hisus to malibulung no mgo otow pinabayo to pananglitan. Waro ig-anad din ko kono no tibo no pananglitan.
Ka sika abalangon, ungod oglibonglibong taman to ogkapurut din ka ogbuyu-on din.
Pogkataga woy ni Hisus to soini no noumaan ki Huan, nan-untud sikandan to balutu no nan-awo dio to ugpaan din su oghondio sikandan to ugpaan no waro otow. Si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din do ka nan-awo dio. Di mohon-ing ka mgo otow no nataga no nig-awo woy si Hisus. Songo nan-awo ka mgo otow dio to lunsud dan no nanundul on sikandan woy ki Hisus.
bukun
Sikoykow, Timoteo, ay-ayari nu paag-agari ka insalig ku koykow. Kono kad og-amut to sikan no mgo otow no ogpamatbat do duon to waro pulus no ogpakalop-ang to kinagian to Magboboot, woy songo kono kad og-amut to mgo otow no ogpaap-apuloy tongod to nahan dan no dakol no katagaanan dan.
Pigsugu ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din to ogman-untud to balutu su oyow oghun-a sikandan og-apot to lanow no sikandin ka ogpohipanawon ka sikan no mohon-ing no mgo otow.
sonson
Ko ogbogoy ki oyow ogparagas on ka oghimuon din, ogpasakup buad ka tibo no mgo kootawan. Ko ogpakatood, ogbobootan ki buwa to mgo taga Ruma no igbuyag no ogmanhondini woy ogpagulak dan buwa ka soin no Dakol no Ampuanan ta woy ogkakaawo ka katondanan ta kai to mgo duma ta no mgo Hudiu.”
duyug
Songo ogpapangumusta a ki Andruniku woy si Hunias. Mgo sulod ku sikandan no nighun-a kanak to ogtuu ki Hisus, woy mgo duma ku rod ko napirisu koy nokani. No ogkatahud sikandan to mgo suguanon ni Hisu Kristu.
Di ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to Magboboot no dio to Dakol no Ampuanan ta lagkos to mgo igbuyag ta, imbogoy ran si Hisus dio ki Pilatu oyow ogbobootan din on to ogpohimatayan on. Nò, inlansang dan sikandin dio to krus.
Bantoy kow su waro kow mataga ko kon-u oglibong ka tagtuun dio to baloy rin, ko oglinob ka allow woy ko liwaro bua to karusiloman woy ko ogkapawo-pawo woy ko og-ukalo to manuk.
Dokad di waro mogtuu ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus su ka pogdinog dan, unawa ro ka kagi ran to waro pulus.
Di sikanta atag, nig-abin kinow rin no mgo sakup. Woy nohimu kinow on no mgo talagpanubad to Labow no Igbuyag ta no si Kristu. Woy nig-indanan kinow to Magboboot oyow ogkounug ta lagboy ka mgo batasan din. Woy sikandin ka lagboy no tagtuun kanta. No ian su oyow ogpakanangonnangon ki to maroyow woy kabolongbolonganan no mgo hinimuan din. Nigpangabangan kinow rin to salo ta oyow ogkaawo kinow on to karusiloman woy ogkahalin kinow on dio to kandin no kaawangan no maroyow lagboy.
Nò, nighokaran on ka sikan no hop-at no diwata oyow ogpanhimatayan ka igkatolu no baad to tibo no mgo otow to kalibutan. Ian su ligkat dongan, noindanan tahan sikandan to oyow sikan ian ka ogkohimu ko ogpokouma on ka sikan ian no uras, to sikan lagboy no allow woy to sikan ian no bulan, woy to sikan ian no tuid.
kobbuloy
Woy songo kono dan og-ongkoran ka mgo maroot no batasan dan. Di ogparagason dan nasi to ogpamunu woy to ogpamulingan no ogsampit to mgo busow, woy to oghilabot to kono no asawa ran woy kono oghagtong to ogpanakow.
Ian su ko og-ampu a to sikan no loinloin no mgo kinagian, ian ogpakaampu ka goinawa ku. Di kono ogpakalagkos ka pogkasabuti ku.
“Nokoy ka ogkoiniatan now?” kagi ni Hisus.
Pogkaponga ni Hisus to pog-anad to tibo soini, nighipanow sikandin ligkat to probinsia to Galilia no nighondio to Hudia no probinsia no nigparagas dio to doipag to woig to Hordan.
Ka otow no ogpamanoik to kayu ungod og-ugsul.
bagoloy
Nò, nighipanow on si Hisus mgo hibatoon din no nokouma on dio to Gitsimini. Kagi rin kandan to, “Pinnuu kow kai su dutun a pad og-ampu.”
kaglas1
Ian og-abin to ulu ka nigbaba to babuy.
topad
Woy og-ampuan noy sikaniu oyow ogmanokal ka goinawa now no ogligkat to ogkabogayan kow to sikan no kabogbogan no ogligkat to dakol no kabogbogan to Magboboot. Ka tuud to sikan, oyow ogkaaguanta now ro ka tibo no mgo igkohirapi now no warad ogkaroromdom now no maroot. Di ogkarago kow nasi.
Malogot ka ignangon ku kaniu. Ko ogkitoon din on ka sika sagboka no karniru no nalagak, dakoldakol ka igkarago din to soini sagboka to sikan no kasiaman woy sasiam no waro nalagak.
Nootawan on si Hisus ko solomsolom to Dominggu. Si Maria Magdalina ka an-anayan no otow no nigkita kandin. Soini Maria ka boi no nigdogil ni Hisus ka papitu no busow no nigsolod to lawa rin.
Ogpanubud ka?
So-oyò koy na-an dò ogkasonson to baoy’n Lusogpit.
tapulun
Ogpatokawan to og-alamaraan oyow ogko-ubus dan oghimatoy
dogpak
tangkob
kopis
sugbuk
Ogmohirap on ian ka iglogpad din to mgo otow no ogtuman to mgo maroot no koibogan to lawa ran woy oglomot to katondanan no ogligkat to Magboboot. Ka sikan no mgo otow no og-anad to ubat, mabulut sikandan woy ogparakoldakol. Kono dan ogtahuron ka og-alap to kabogbogan no og-ugpo dio to Langit. Di oglangubon dan atag to ogdoot.
pisu
Ko malasi ogturas to baraha, ungod oggulò.
sampot
sombig
Goram to holog.
No nigbogayan dan si Hisus to songo tampod to ngalap to woig no tahan no nalutu.
woy ko ogbuyuan kow to anak now to atolug, kono now man igbogoy ka salipitsipit no ogmasakit ko ogkagat.
Ian su ogkoiniat a to ognangonnangon to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon dio to mgo otow to mgo lunsud no waro pad makarinog tongod ki Hisu Kristu, su kono a ogkoiniat ko ogkoikatan ku ka hinimuan to dangob no otow no nokohun-a nignangonnangon kandan tongod kandin.
onong
Di ko mohuri no allow ko rio ki to Magboboot, mohon-ing no dakol no otow kai to kalibutan kuntoon no molintok on dio. Woy songo mohon-ing ka mgo molintok no otow dini kuntoon no dakol atag sikandan dio to Magboboot.”
Di duon mgo Parisiu no nigkagi to, “Manio to ogpupu kow to Allow ta to Oghimoloy to duon Balaod ta to kono kid oghimu to soini ko Allow ta to Oghimoloy?”
No ian su nataga ki to pogkaponga to pogkamatoy ni Kristu, nouyag on sikandin no konad on ogkohutuk ogkamatoy su warad on ka kamatayon dio to kandin.
Nò, nighimata on ka talagbantoy to pirisuan. Pogpitow rin to napulasan on ka mgo lokob to pirisuan, nighulabut din on ka balarow rin no oglugo porom su nahan din no namallaguy on ka mgo otow no nanapirisu.
Kagi rin, “Hondio kow to sika no lunsud no kai to tangkaan ta. Ko ogpokouma kow ro, ogkitoon now ka nohikotan no asno no duon nati rin. Hokara now woy tuyuka now kai to koddi duma to nati rin.
omis
Ko nokoy ka pog-ugpo ta no naabin kinow on ni Hisus, kono kid on oghalinhalin.
Ligkat ki Hisu Kristu, nohoy-uan a to Magboboot no nighimu a rin no suguanon din to oyow og-anaron ku ka mohon-ing no mgo otow to oyow mohon-ing ka ogtuu woy to oyow ogpaagad-agad sikandan ki Hisu Kristu dio to agad hondoi no mgo ugpaan. No ian to oyow ogtahuron on ka ngaran din.
bansag
kagat
Amana so-ini no batò no ungod ogsinogow no ma-agol so bo-bò.
na-an
Nò, ko tu-tuu pa to kono ogkouyag ka mgo nammatoy, songo kono poron no tu-tuu to nouyag on si Hisu Kristu ligkat to kandin no kamatayon.
konò ogsagman
Waro otow no matul-id ka pogsabut din, woy waro otow no ogpamangho to oyow ogkatagaan din ka tu-tuu no dalan no oghondio to Magboboot.
nokal
Ka soini no sulat, nigligkat kanak no si Pablo. Nohimu a no suguanon ni Hisu Kristu su sikan ka imboot to Magboboot kanak. Ogsulatan ku sikaniu no dio to lunsud to Episu no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu woy ogkasaligan to ogpaagad-agad to mgo sugu din kaniu.
Ogsiu-on ki to Liboganon.
obos
losang
Woy ian to inhongkai ni Saulo su duon katondanan din ligkat to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to oyow ogpandakopon din ka tibo no mgo otow kai no ogsampit to ngaran nu.”
Nigtabak si Hisus. Kagi rin, “Wa labot to kandin no salo woy ko salo to amoy rin mgo inoy rin to nabutud sikandin. Di nigbogoy ka Magboboot to nabutud oyow ogkitoon ka kabogbogan to Magboboot ko ogbawian din ka nabutud.
duyaruy
An-anokon din ka lawa rin. Ogbulungon din ka lawa rin to woig.
Di duon mgo Hudiu no nigtuu ki Hisus no tahan no nasakup to in-anad to mgo Parisiu. Nigsasindog on sikandan no kagi ran to, “Ka sikan no mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no kono no Hudiu, og–awoson no igpatuli ka mgo iglukos dan. Woy og–udlingan ta sikandan to oyow ogtumanon dan ka Balaod ni Moisis.” kagi.
Ogkatampod to mapotì ka ikug to ambow no kawwilì.
Ko og-ogotan, konò ogsagman.
mukulmukul
ugat
Di nighipanow ka sika otow no nambatbat to mgo otow no kagi rin, “Nabawian ad on ni Hisus.” Puun to kagi to sikan no nabawian, konad ogpakasolod si Hisus to agad hondoi no lunsud ko ogkitoon to mgo otow. Dio do to libuwasan to mgo lunsud og-ugpo si Hisus to waro otow woy ogkalimud dio to kandin ka mgo otow no nigpuun to agad hondoi.
Pakolkohoy-ui now to Magboboot ka mgo otow no ogbayadbayad kaniu. Ogbuyu ki to oyow ogkabuligan sikandan. Kono ta igpanungayow.
Di ko ogpaboot ki to Gimukud to Magboboot, kono kid on ogkabootan to Balaod ni Moisis.
Di kono ku ignangon to natuman kud ka tibo no sikan no innangon ku woy ko natibulus kud ka tibo no ogkoiniatan to Magboboot. Di ogpoomotan ku ka oghimuon ku to oyow ogkatuman on ka tibo no sikan su soini ian ka tuud ni Hisu Kristu no nig-abin a rin no sakup din.
alibood
gisì
bantang
Nò, sikaniu no ogsamili to mgo duma now di songo oghimu kow to sikan dod no hinimuan dan no maroot, do kow og-iman-iman to kono kow ogpakalagkos to iglogpad to Magboboot to duma no mgo otow no oghimu to maroot.
dinog
alibu
limusong
lotuv
alang-alang
Sikan ian, kono now ongkori ka pogsalig now to Magboboot, su ko ogparagason now ro duon, ogpakapurut kow uromo to sikan no karoyawan no igbalos kaniu.
Ka sikan no ingkaanad noy kaniu tongod to kabogbogan woy ka poglibong to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu kai to tano, kono no ubat-ubat do no nangnangonon no nighimu ro duon to doromdom to mgo otow. Ian su nigkita koy lagboy to kabogbogan din no nigligkat to Magboboot.
kamolong
Kagi to balu, "Og-abalangon ku ka baloy no nighimu ni Jeremy di warò pad igkabayad ku."
Nigbabansagon sikandin no kagi rin to, “Nagulakgulak on ka mabantug no lunsud to Babilunia. Nohimu on no ugpaanan to mgo busow woy ka mgo balbal. Woy dio ogman-ugpo ka agad nokoy mgo maligsom woy ka maroot no mgo manukmanuk.
Dokad di, ka mgo Hudiu no waro mogtuu ki Hisus, nabolu su noima to mgo otow no nig–amut woy ki Pablo. Sikandan, niglimud dan on ka mgo maroot no otow no waro batasan. No ka sikan no mgo maroot no mgo otow, impalimud dan on ka mohon–ing no mgo otow woy pigsasow dan on ka mgo taga lunsud oyow ogkohimu on no dakol no samuk. No nanhondio to baloy ni Hasun no intulud dan on ka lokob to baloy su oyow ogdakopon dan porom si Pablo daruwa ki Silas su ighatod dan porom sikandan dio to mgo otow.
Ka soini no iam no sabut, kono ogkounawa to sikan no tahan no insabut ku dongan to mgo kaap-apuan dan to sikan no allow to nigduma kud sikandan ligkat to ugpaan to Ehipto. Ian su waro dan paragasa ka pogtuman to sikan no sabut ku kandan. Sikan ian to nig-iniugan ku sikandan,’ ” kagi rin.
Sikan ian, puruta now on ka tibo no kalaglagan no igbogoy to Magboboot kaniu to igkaatu now ki Satanas. Ian su oyow, ko ogkoumaan kow on to allow no igkohirapi now, ogpakatood kow to og-atu no kono kow ogkoituos su ogpakapanikanddal kow ro taman to ogkapongaan now on ian to pog-atu now.
Ko og-a-alibood, ungod ogwo-ilwo-il ka bituka nu su warad tagù din.
To pogkalimud to mgo hibatoon ni Hisus dio to probinsia to Galilia, kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Koddi no ian Kakoy to Koot-otawan, marani on ka allow no ogdakapon a no ighatod a rio to mgo dakol no otow.
pasad
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Ko nataga ka poron to sikan no igbogoy to Magboboot koykow woy ko nataga ka ko hontow ka ogbuyu koykow kuntoon to woig, koykow on ka ogbuyu koddi no nabogayan kad poron to sikan no woig no igkouyag nu.”
taan
piong
abalang
Tiopilu, soini ka igkaruwa no sulat ku koykow. Ka an–anayan no sulat ku, dio ku bunsura to pognangonnangon to mgo hinimuan ni Hisus woy ka mgo pog–anad din. No dio a mataman to sikan no allow no pogbatun on si Hisus dio to Langit. Di to waro pad batuna, duon pad insugu din to sikan no naalam no mgo suguanon din. No ka mgo sugu din kandan, nigligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot.
Ka amoy ni Hili si Matat. Ka amoy ni Matat si Libi. Ka amoy ni Libi si Milki. Ka amoy ni Milki si Hanai. Ka amoy ni Hanai dangob no Husi.
Piglansang dan ka songo manipis no kayu dio to ampow to ulu ni Hisus no nasulatan ka imbayung dan kandin. Kagi to sikan no imbayung, “Soini si Hisus, ka Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu.”
sugba
Ka otow no og-abinon to sikoddi ka igbuyag din dio to tangkaan to mgo otow, songo og-abinon ku sikandin dio to tangkaan to Amoy ku no dio to langit,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ka Magbobo-ot, ian ka du-on dakol no kabogbogan.
Pogka-awò ka tahan no doun, ogliwan to iam no ogpangabukad on to bulak.
hidhid
Ogsayoon tanow ka Amoy ta no ka Magboboot to waro katamanan. Maroyow ian.
Ka ulu to otow no nigtinugpò, nakasungal diò to batu to woig no napalisan ka bokod [rin] no nasakitan lagboy sikandin.
Niglibong si Hisus dio to sikan no tatolu no hibatoon din no nokohirogo on sikandan. Nigpukow rin si Pedro to mgo inso din, “Simon, nohirogo kad naan? Wara ka makabantoy to agad sagboka ro no oras?”
Nò, ko oghingaranan ku ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, songo ogkohingaranan ku rod ka Gimukud to Magboboot. No ko ogpaboot ki kandin, nakalibuwas kid on to salo ta no kono kid on ogpouripon to Balaod ni Moisis.
Nigtulu-an to uran ka homoy.
Ognangonan kow ni Tikiku to tibo no ingkabayo ku kai. Sikandin, sulod ta to pogtuu ki Hisus no indakoli noy to goinawa woy duma ta rod no suguanon to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus Woy ogkasaligan sikandin to og-alap-alap to katondanan no ingkabogoy kandin.
To konon amana no mariu si Hisus mgo hibatoon din to Hirusalim no marani on sikandan to ugpaan to Bitpahi woy marani to sika malopot no bubungan no oghingaranan to Olibu, nigsugu ni Hisus ka darua no hibatoon din to oghun-a kandan.
kinotoy
Pokog-un-unawaa now.
Nigbunsud nighutuk si Hisus to og-anad dio to ilis to Lanow no Galilia. To lagboy no mohon-ing no mgo otow ka nalibulung dio to kandin, nig-untud si Hisus to sagboka no balutu no nigpinnuu. Duon do dio to pantad ka mgo otow.
Ogpanhimatayan ka mohon-ing no mgo otow to moirob woy ka duma, ogkarakop on no oghimuon no oripon dio to agad hondoi no mariu no mgo ugpaan. Ka Hirusalim, ogkaagow to kono no Hudiu, no ogbobootan dan on ka sikan no lunsud taman to allow ran to ogpaawo on sikandan to Magboboot.”
Sikaniu no mgo datu, taman kuntoon, lagboy no maroyow ka ig-ugpo now woy ka mgo igkarago now kai to soini no kalibutan. Di ian now ogkounawaan ka ayam no ogpalambogon ta pad woy ta oghimatayan oyow ogkoonon.
Ko dio dod to lunsud ka boi, nighinggat poron si Hisus to mgo hibatoon din. Kagi ran, “Buyag, koon ka pa.”
dokot
Di ko du-on ka igpangalasag, konò ki ogka-agkapan ka og-ugpò su ogmabogat ki to og-ugpò.
hab-un
Kohoy-u kaniu, su ogkounawa kow to nabutud no otow no oghipanow no ogkitkiton now ka dangob no nabutud. Ig-anad now ko duon otow no ognangon to hogot no igpangulibot din ka Dakol no Ampuanan oyow ogtuuan ka kagi rin, waro salo ko kono din ogtumanon ka hogot no innangon din. Songo ognangon kow no ko ogpangulibot to oghingaranan din ka mgo bulawan no dio to Dakol no Ampuanan, duon salo din ko kono din ogtumanon ka hogot no innangon din.
batò
No ko ogkitoon dan ka obol din to ogkasilaban on, ogpakangangang to kagi ran to, “Waro ogkounawa to kabantug to sikan no lunsud.”
Tapukon ki.
alang-alang
Di nigtabak si Hisus to, “Duon ingkasulat dongan to kagi to Magboboot to, ‘kono no koonon do ka igkouyag to mgo otow.’ ”
Pinayagan ka gakit
To nighipanow on ka mgo hibatoon no pigsugu ni Huan, kagi ni Hisus to mgo otow no mohon-ing tongod ki Huan to, “Nokoy ka noiniatan now to pogpitow now nokani no nighondio kow to holholawan? Og-inso a kaniu ko ian inhondio now su oyow ogpitawon now ro ka tibogow no ogkabanloybanloy to kalamag?
Agad hontow otawa no ogtuman to igkoiniatan to Amoy ku no Magboboot no dio to langit, songo inoy ku woy mgo hari ku, mgo ataboy ku sikandan.”
goon
Ko nigpasalamatan din on ka Magboboot, nanlotiblotib din on ka paan no kagi rin to, “Ka soini no paan no nalotiblotib on, lawa ku no igbogoy ku no igliwan kaniu. No himua now ka soini no ogdoromdomon a now.”
‘Sikan ian, og-ongkoran to lukos ka amoy rin woy ka inoy rin ko og-asawa on sikandin oyow ka darua, ogkasagboka sikandin to asawa rin.’
Agad matikang woy ko masagkop, makopal woy ko manipis no igliu to baloy woy ko lama, ogkohingaranan no alad.
No ka sikan no papitu no mgo diwata to Magboboot no nan-alap to sikan no papitu no mgo igbayadbayad, nanlibuwas dio to Dakol no Ampuanan to Magboboot. Nigkikinabo sikandan to malayag lagboy no manggad woy duon insagubabat no bulawan dio to mgo sosolobon dan.
“Nig-asawa nu ka lalimma no lukos no ogtagtagooran ka ro duon to sikan no lukos kuntoon. Malogot ka tabak nu koddi,” kagi ni Hisus.
Nò, nigmoin-insooy ka mgo hibatoon din to, “Duon buwa nig-alap kandin to koonon?”
Nò, sikan no mgo otow no nigdakop ki Hisus, inhatod dan sikandin dio to baloy ni Kaipas no Labow to mgo Talagpanubad. Nalimud dio ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy ka mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu.
Di ogsayoon ta ka Magboboot su ligkat to nighimu ni Hisu Kristu no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, ogpakaroog ki ro to mgo salo ta woy to kamatayon ta.
pitow
Nò, onow kow on! Sasindog kow on no oghipanow kid on. Pitow kow, kaid on ka sikan no lukos no ogpanabod koddi.”
Ko putung ki, agad ko du-on oghusoy to goinawa, konò ogkohusoy no ogkaroromdom to oghimatoy to lawa rin.
pagba
wangwang
lukilom
No ka mgo lukos no talagbulig to pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu, songo og-awoson to sagboka ro ka asawa ran, woy to maroyow ka pog-alap dan to asawa ran, mgo anak dan.
yogyog
Sikan ka nighimu rin to oyow sikanta no nigtuu on kandin, ig-ayun din on ka goinawa ta dio to Magboboot su waro solug no maroot to goinawa ta. No ogkounawa to nigdigus kinow rin woy nig-awo din on ka mgo salo ta su nigpaagad-agad kinow to kinagian to Magboboot woy nigpabautismu kinow on.
Noinuinu lagboy ka tibo no mgo otow. Kagi ran, “Lagboy no maroyow ka tibo no oghimuon din. Agad ka nabongol, ogpakarinog on woy ka nawolok, ogpakakagi on.”
luud
nokal
Ko diò to mabolbol no woig du-on kayu no ogkawo-il, sikan ka ogkawolwol no kayu.
Di og-awoson to ogpakasabut ka sikan no mgo otow ko ogpokouma koy, og-unawoon ku ro ka oghimuon ku to sikan no innangonnangon ku to mgo sulat ku.
tuluy
umbaba
Woy ogkohingarani to og-apu-ung ka Liboganon ko ogpangubus to napù to pogsamba.
Nò, nighipanow on ka nigsugu ni Hisus no nigkita ran ka nati unawa to innangon ni Hisus kandan.
Nò, kuntoon, Amo, ipalibong nu ka kabogbogan ku dio to tangkaan nu kuntoon. Sikan ka kabogbogan ku no dia a pad to longod nu woy nohimu ka soin no kalibutan.”
Koddì ka ogbangkalow to sikan no balagon no nalangkung.
bulung
Pogdinog to mgo suguanon ni Hisus to kagi to diwata, nighipanow on. Pogkapawo on, nansolod man do sikandan dio to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu woy nigpan–anad dan ka mgo otow. Nò, nokouma on ka Labow no Talagpanubad woy ka mgo duma rin, no impalimud dan on ka tibo no mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy ka mgo pogbuyagon to mgo Hudiu. Woy nigsugu to oyow igpaangoy on ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus no napirisu.
Kagi man do ni Hisus, “Ko warad on ka sikan no igkabaybayari ogkaawo to layag to allow woy konad oglayag ka bulan.
“Og-inso a kaniu ko waro kow mataga to og-awos pad to og-aguanta pad ka Im-imanan ta woy ogsolod to Pandatuan din?”
Aligbat a no batò a, tahan ad on ka nig-ugpò kai to Mansalinow.
Maroyow a koykow.
Maniò to piggamak nu ka ko-onon to moon-ing ki man.
Kagi to sikan no nigtakow, “Og-abinon ku to koddì ian ka nigtakow koykow.”
limatok
sukun
pa-agad-agad
dulayow
bo-ot
su waro nannuguni to Magboboot ka mgo Hudiu no ian ingkapananglitan to tahan no sugpang. Sikan ian, ko kono kow songo ogtuu, songo kono kow rin dod ogkannugunan.
kitang
kai
Dokad di to pogdinog dan to kagi ni Pilipi, nigtuu on sikandan to sikan no Maroyow no Nangnangonon din tongod to pandatuan to Magboboot woy tongod to duon katondanan to ngaran ni Hisu Kristu. No nigpabautismu on ka nigtuu on ki Hisus, mgo lukos woy boi.
Nò, nigpurut to mgo sundalu ka salapi no nigpaagad-agad to insugu kandan. Nò, agad kuntoon no mgo allow, sikan pad ian ka nigtuuan to mgo Hudiu.
“Nò, to niglopow ka labow no igbuyag oyow ogsagman to tibo no mgo magaliug din, duon nigkita rin ka sagboka no waro nig-ilis to kinabo no litos to og-amut to kasal.
tungkò-tungkò
Kagi ni Istiban, “To dio dod ka mgo kaap–apuan ta to holholawan, songo pig–alap dan ka tagooran no ampuanan dan to tu–tuu ian no Magboboot. Ka sikan, in–ayun lagboy to sikan no innangon woy impapitow to Magboboot ki Moisis.
Ogbayaran ka sikan no mgo otow no oggaani. Ka sikan no mgo otow no nagaani on, ogkootawan no waro katamanan sikandan dio to langit. Nò, ka sikan no nig-orok to kagi to Magboboot woy ka sikan no oggaani, narago on sikandan no darua.
Du-on ta isabuk ka batu woy tamiluk no igbakolow to otow diò to bolad woy igbali-og din
Agad Koddi no Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan, wara a nighondini to soini no kalibutan oyow ogpangabangan a to mgo otow. Ka tuud ku ian oyow ogpakapangabang a kandan woy to oyow ogsalilin ka mohon-ing no mgo otow to kamatayon ku.”
sopì
mudlav
Ogkapanoy ka goinawa ta. Inat to du-on boog taan to goinawa ta.
tagpos
Nig-onow woy nigparagas nigsasindog ka sikan no otow woy nig-uli on sikandin.
No ko nataga ka mgo nigtuu to oghimatayan porom si Saulo to mgo Hudiu no ogkagi to Ginirigu, pighinggat dan sikandin dio to lunsud to Sisaria, woy impohondio dan sikandin to lunsud to Tarsu.
No nignangonan ni Kornilio sikandan to tibo no ingkanangon to diwata kandin. Pogkaponga, pigsugu din on sikandan dio to Hupi.
Ian ku ignangon ka soini su mohon-ing ka ogpan-anad no oghihipanow kai to ampow to soini no tano. No ogpan-anad sikandan to si Hisu Kristu, kono no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no nigligkat to langit no noimu on no otow. Ogpanggawoy sikandan woy og-usigon dan si Kristu.
So-ikan
Nig-inso ka diwata ki Maria to, “Igi, manio to ogsinogow ka?” Nigtabak si Maria to, “Ogsinogow a su nigkuo dan on ka lawa to Igbuyag ku no wara a mataga ko hondoi ran on isabuk.”
su duon ingkasulat to Tahan no Kasulatan to kinagian to Magboboot to: “Agad hontow no ogtuu kandin, kono ogpokogsondit.”
ligdus
igpalayud ka goinawa
Puun to sika anaranan to mgo og-ampu, nighipanow si Hisus mgo hibatoon din woy ki Santiago woy si Huan dio to baloy ni Simon woy si Andres.
Nokani, kono ki pad no mgo sakup to Magboboot, di kuntoon nohimu kinow on no sakup din. Nokani, waro ki pad nohoy-ui to Magboboot, di kuntoon, nohoy-uan kinow rin on.
Ko oghimatoy ki to kuddò, ogtinku-on to poka to wasoy.
Nò, panagana kow. Oglibong si Hisu Kristu kai to tano no ogpakaruma to mgo gapun. Tibo no mgo otow, agad ka niglansang kandin dio to krus, ogpakakita kandin. No ka tibo no mgo koot-otawan kai to tano, ogpakapandawot to igkalango tongod kandin. Malogot ian.
tagbanua
Songo duon ingkasulat dio to kinagian to Magboboot no nigkagi rin to, ‘Ka lagboy no igkoiniatan ku, ian to dakol ka igkohoy-u now to mgo duma now; kono ian no igtubad now no mgo ayam no kono ku ogkoiniatan.’ ” Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Ko litos porom ka pogsabut now to soini, kono now porom ogbobootan ka mgo otow no waro salo.
Ko ogkadi-okan ka bogas to kapayas no nohinug, ogkapipi.
Ian dò ogka-ali-an ka duma to ogbantoy; mangkuan konò ogka-ali-a ka kandin no goinawa.
talukow
dokdok
libu
Waswasi nu ka gomawan su’gbayò a.
Ko iam ka ganat, konò ogkakanat su mabogong. Kò ki ogpakalogon.
Si Jesse ka amoy to Labow no Igbuyag dongan no si Dabid. Si Dabid ka amoy ni Solomon. To inoy rin, asawa ni Urias no songo naasawa on ni Dabid.
Ko warò siak, ogtokoron ta ko og-os-os su dakol on ka pantad no ogko-ongkoran to woig.
Nò, nigtuman on to sikan no kapituan woy darua no mgo sakup no insugu ni Hisus no nan-uli on sikandan. Narago-dago ka goinawa ran no kagi ran ki Hisus to, “Buyag, agad ka mgo busow, ogpaagad-agad kanami to ogdogilon noy on pinabayo to ngaran nu.”
Ogpasalamatan ta ka Magboboot no ian Magboboot woy Amoy to Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow no si Hisu Kristu. Ian su dakol ka pogkohoy-u rin kanta. No ligkat to pog-uyag din ki Hisu Kristu, nigbogayan kinow to iam no pogkouyag ta. Sikan ian to og-iman-imanan tad on ian to ogkouyag kinow on uromo.
Wa kow pad makasabut to ian do litos kanta ko sagboka ro ka ogpakimatoy to tibo no mgo otow oyow kono ki ogkoubus.” Ian ka kagi ni Kaipas.
Di, kono no suguanon ni Hisus ka tibo no nigtuu. Woy songo kono no talagnangon to kagi rin ka tibo. Woy kono no talag-anad to kagi rin ka tibo. Songo kono ogbogayan ka tibo to kabogbogan to oyow ogpokohimu sikandan to mgo kabolongbolonganan.
Konò oglinulinu ko nokoy ka kandin no tu-ud.
Tatolu no allow si Saulo dio to Damasku no kono ogkita woy waro pigkoon woy waro pig–inum.
Kagi ni Hisus to mgo otow, “Malogot ian ka ogkagion ku kaniu, ka intagu to soini no publi no balu, dakoldakol ka imbogoy rin to tibo no mgo otow,
Songo allow to nigkita ni Hisus ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no nalibulung dio to kandin, omunaan nigkagian din ka mgo hibatoon din to, “Sakoy kinow to balutu su oghondio kinow to doipag to lanow.”
Nò, pila on no allow no ungod ogluyudluyud ka boi kanami no sikan do ian ka ogkagion din taman to napolalan on ka goinawa ni Pablo. Nigtangkaan din on ka boi no nigkagian din ka busow to, “Ligkat to katondanan to ngaran ni Hisu Kristu, ogdogilan kud sikoykow to awo kad on to soini no boi.” Inogo on no nig–awo on ka busow ligkat to lawa to sikan no boi.
Tongod to soini, igbogoy ku rio to koykow ka koddi no goinawa oyow ogtuman lagboy to koykow no goinawa sikandan.
No, niglibong on si Hisus dio to ilis to Lanow to Galilia. Ko dio, nalibulung ka mgo otow dio no nig-anad din sikandan.
Kagi ni Pedro ki Hisus to, “Igbuyag, maroyow to kai ki. Ko ogkoiniatan nu, oghimuon ku ka tatolu no tukbung. Sagboka ka koykow woy sagboka ki Moisis woy sagboka ki Elias.”
Ko og–inso ka pad, ogkanangonan ka to waro do mogsubla to sampulu on no allow ku woy daruwa ka poghondio ku to lunsud to Hirusalim su ogsimba a dio.
Tibo soini no doromdom dan, ogkatagaan on ko allow no ogpabobootan to Magboboot ki Hisu Kristu ka tibo no nokoholos no doromdom to tibo no mgo otow. Sikan dod ka in-anad ku kaniu ligkat to Maroyow no Nangnangonon.
No ka Magboboot, ian ogligkatan to ogkaaguanta ta ka igkabaybayari ta, woy sikandin dod ka ogligkatan to ogkabuligan ka goinawa ta. Ogbuyu a kandin to oyow ogkasagboka ro ka goinawa now tibo no oyow ogkounug now ka batasan ni Hisu Kristu.
Ognangonan kow rò ko ogkapalusan on.
pispis
Ka otow no ogbasa to diblu, bokaron din ka ogbasa.
waswas
omaw
uli-ulì kulitut
sapsap
kilid
bayukan
Woy ogkatagaan koy rod no suguanon to Magboboot su maroyow ka mgo batasan noy woy duon katagaanan noy to kinagian din woy mananoy koy ogkabolu to mgo otow di magaan koy atag ogkohoy-u. Woy ogbuligan koy to Gimukud to Magboboot woy ogdakoli noy to goinawa ka mgo otow.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan pinabayo to pananglitan, no nigkagi to, “Agad nokoy no pinamula no waro inpamula to Amoy ku no Magboboot ogbagnuson din.
“No sikan ian to duon innangon dongan to Magboboot su ligkat to natagaan din ka tibo,” kagi ni Hisus. “Kagi to Magboboot dongan to, ‘Duon mgo otow no talagnangon to kagi ku woy duon mgo suguanon ku no igpaalap ku dio to mgo otow. Dokad di ogkohimatayan on to mgo otow ka duma woy duon dod duma no ogbaybayaran to mgo otow sikandan,’ kagi to Magboboot,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ko diò ta to so-og isabuk ka harayu, naan pà ko ogkari-okan woy ko ogkagulak on.
ulun
Sikan ian, ka maroyow ku ko ogliwan on ogkaasawa ka sikan no mgo nabalu on no boi no bato-bato pad oyow og-anak woy ogtantanuran dan ka pog-ugpo dan su oyow kono ki ogkasamilian to mgo otow no og-ogot kanta.
tuman
Ka baloy no konò ogkapongaan to oghimu, warò natibug.
ligtung
komù
Ka igkalalimma, unisi. No ka igkohon-om, kurnalina. Ka igkapitu, kirisulitu. Ka igkawawalu, birilu. Ka igkasiam, tupasiu. Ka igkasampulu, karisuparasu. Ka igkasampulu woy sagboka, asintu. No ka igkasampulu woy daruwa, amatista.
Nignangon ka diwata to Magboboot kanak to, “Malogot woy ogkasaligan ka soini no ignangon ku. Ka Magboboot no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag, ian ka ogbogoy to Gimukud din dio to mgo talagnangon to kinagian din. No sikandin dod ian ka nigsugu to diwata rin dio to mgo sakup din oyow igpapitow rin kandan ka ogkoumaan no konad on ogkalugoy.
tudtud
kun
Ka Magboboot ka nigpagamit to sikan no batu no nahan dan no waro pulus. Lagboy no maroyow ian to goinawa ta.”
singsing
Du-on boi no nigpunpun to linobaan din no ogbaluton din to tol-ob.
Ogpulasan to talagbantoy to gumawan no ogpakasolod sikandin. Ogtokoron to mgo karniru rin ka lagong din. Og-umawan din ka kandin no karniru no ogdumoon din ka karniru rin dio to libuwasan.
Ko batò no og-anaron ta, maga-an ogpakasabut.
warò
olon
Nigtabak sikandan to, “Duon mgo otow no kagi ran to ‘Sikoykow si Huan no Talagbautismu.’ Kagi to duma no mgo otow to koykow si Ilias. Duon dod dangob no mgo otow no kagi ran no sikoykow ian ka songo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot.”
Loin ka mgo tuud to mgo lukos no kono ogpangasawa. Duon ka kono og-asawa su sikan ka inkabato dan. Duon duma no kono og-asawa su nigbakitan sikandan. Duon pad duma no mgo otow no kono og-asawa su oyow ogkatuman dan ka igpohimu kandan bahin to Pogsugu to Magboboot. Ka mgo lukos no ogpakatood to soini, ogparagas do duon sikandan.”
Poglibuwas dan on to sikan no bobootanan to mgo otow, nigpanangnangonoy to, “Waro man nohimu ni Pablo no litos to igkamatoy woy ko igkapirisu rin.”
Nò mgo sulod, ogkoiniatan ku no ogdoromdomon ta ko nokoy ka nohimu to mgo kaap-apuan ta no nigluyud ki Moisis dongan. Tibo kandan noholongan to gapun no nig-al-alagad kandan. Woy tibo sikandan nakabayo to sikan no nabotak no dagat no nohimu on no dalan dan.
Ampu kow dio to Magboboot to kono no longdong ko ogkoumaan kow to soin no mgo allow.
Nigdani woy nigluhud ka boi duon to tangkaan ni Hisus no kagi rin to, “Buyag, buligi a nu bag.”
Natampod ka pogdumaruma ta su diò kid to mariù noko-ugpò.
Ian su og-awoson to, ka sikan no talabau now to tagtuun kaniu, ogligkat to maroyow no goinawa now to oghimu. No ka sikan, ogkounawa ko kono do no otow ro ka oghimuan now, di ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta ka oghimuan now.
laku
Nigsusulun ka gimukud ku.
woy malayag lagboy ka kinabo din woy maputi lagboy; ogpamalusigsig no ogsilangan ki to layag to maputi. Waro ka agad sagboka no talagpanlaba dini to soin no kalibutan no ogpakamaputi no ogkounawa to soini kapotii to kinabo ni Hisus.
Ko nokoy ka igkoiniatan ta no oghimuon to mgo duma ta kanta, songo sikan ian ka oghimuon ta kandan. Soini ka kalitukan to Balaod no ingalat ni Moisis, woy ka kalitukan to in-anad to mgo talagnangon to Magboboot dongan.”
Di si Hisus, nataga to nigbogayan to Magboboot no Amoy sikandin to tibo no kabogbogan no ogligkat kandin woy nataga to dio to Magboboot ka ogligkatan din woy dio og-uli.
otok
Du-on kayu no ogngaranan to gisois no ian igpanomog diò to homoy oyow ogko-obolan.
No to pog-unug ta to goinawa to Magboboot, iglagkos ta to pogpaam-amanooy ta. No to sikan no pogpaam-amanooy, iglagkos ta ka igdakoli to goinawa ta to mgo otow.
Woy ko duon boi no duon on asawa rin no waro pad nigtuu, di ogkoiniatan din to og-ugpo og-awoson to songo kono din og-ongkoran ka asawa rin.
alinuok
Kagi to mgo otow to sikan no boi to, “Ogtuu koy on ki Hisus di konad on ka koykow ro no innangon Ogtuu koy on su nigdinog koy on to kandin no kagi. Woy nataga koy on to kandin man ian ka sika Talagpangabang to mgo otow kai to soin no kalibutan.”
Mgo sulod, anak kid on ian to Magboboot kuntoon, di waro ki pad mataga ko nokoy ka ogkoilingan ta uromo. Di nataga ki, ko oglibong si Hisus kai to kalibutan, ogkoiling kid on kandin su ogkamolmologan tad sikandin to pogpitow.
Konò ka ogsasabandal diò to songo baloy.
Du-on istudianti no nigbubu-al no ogpanigbas to duma rin.
Ko ogkamatoy ki, ka mgo kalaglagan ta ogkaggalat dò no konò ta ogka-alap diò to kamatayon.
kamol
Natagaan ni Hisus ka duon dio to goinawa ran no nigkagi to, “Ko dio to sagboka no ugpaan no duon ka mgo sakup to mgo igbuyag no ogmabunbunuoy, magaan ogkaawo ka pandatuan dan. Songo ogkawaro ko ogmabunbunuoy ka mgo otow to sagboka no lunsud woy ko songo lunggunan to sagboka no baloy ko malasi ogpog-ogotoy sikandan, ogpakasuwoysuwoy on no warad on ogbulbuligoy.
No, nigsolod ka anak ni Hirodias no boi dio to tangkaan to mgo magaliug woy nigsayow on no maroyow lagboy ka sinayawan din ki Hirodis, mgo magaliug din. Nò, kagi ni Hirodis to sika boi, “Igi, nokoy ka ogkoiniatan nu? Ogbogayan ka to agad nokoy no oghingaranan nu.
Ian su kono oghalinhalin ka goinawa to Magboboot tongod to pog-abin din to mgo otow woy ka pogkohoy-u rin kandan.
Igtuil ka dagum
pansob
Ogkuiton ta ka bogas to kapayas no noinug.
ko-on
Sikan ian, kono ki ogkapogul to oghimu to maroyow to duma ta su oyow ko ogpokouma on ka allow no nig-alam to Magboboot, ogkabogayan ki nikandin to igpapulus kanta.
Sugkalon ki
Hontow
Ligkat to pogtuu to tibo soini, mohon-ing ka nohimu ran. Duon nakaroog to mgo koot-otawan woy ka mgo igbuyag dan no nigmoog-ogotoy on kandan. Maayun ka pogpangatondanan dan woy natuman on to duma ka innangon to Magboboot kandan. Woy duon duma no nakaroog to mgo lion no waro kagata.
ponga
hi
Kagi rin, “Natuman on ka mgo allow to Magboboot no magaan on ogbunsud ka Pogsugu din. Sonditi now woy ongkori now ka mgo salo now no tuui now ro ka Maroyow no Nangnangonon.”
Woy songo ogkounawa ka to sikan no otow no ogpaag-agapoy oyow ogpitawan ko hontow ka matallong no ogpallaguy. Di kono ogkabogayan to igsayo ka sikan no ogpakaroog ko kono din ogtumanon ka innangon to mgo talagboot.
“Ka Pandatuan to Magboboot dio to langit ogkounawa to katondanan to songo labow no igbuyag no nigpanagana to pagkoonan su og-asawa ka anak din.
Di ka otow no layun ogdoromdom ko ogmonuon din to ogtuman to mgo maroot no koiniatan to lawa rin, ogpakaatu sikandin to Magboboot, su kono ogpaagad-agad to Balaod din. No kono do no sikan do su agad ko ogpaagad-agad poron, kono ogkohimu.
Nigtuman si Sakarias to batasan to ogtotomog to mohomut dio to solod to Ampuanan no ka mgo otow no mohon-ing, nalibulung dio to lama to Ampuanan no nigdorongandongan no nig-ampu to Magboboot.
No sikan no oghimuon now, sikan ka igkoindanan now to nataga kow woy songo oghulug kow rod to mgo hinimuan to mgo kaap-apuan now dongan su sikandan ka nighimatoy to sikan no mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, no sikaniu on ka oghimu to mgo sabalanan dan,” kagi ni Hisus.
latìn
balò
Di kuntoon to nigtuu kid on ki Kristu, nounawa to nakalagkos kinow on to pogkamatoy rin woy naawo kid on to pogkouripon ta to mgo salo. Ka tuud to sikan, oyow ogkohimu no ogpaagad-agad kid on to Magboboot. No ka sikan, ogligkat to iam no pogkouyag ta no ogligkat to pogboot to Gimukud to Magboboot no imbogoy kanta, no kono ogligkat to pogtuman ta to sikan no Balaod no ingkasulat dongan.
Ka otow no ogkapogkot on ka pa-a rin, og-ilud-ilud ka poghipanow rin.
Mananoy ki ogpoko-uma su og-aligu kid on ogbayò.
To pogkapirisu ni Huan, nighondio to probinsia to Galilia si Hisus no dio din nangoni ka mgo otow bahin to Maroyow no Nangnangonon puun to Magboboot.
Purut ka. Alam ka to ogko-ibogan nu.
Ka mgo kagi ran, ogkounawa to lobong no og-uwang no waro bunbuni. Ka kagi to dilo dan ka iggawoy ran to duma ran. No ka ogkagion dan, ian ogkounawaan ka pogkagat to ulod no oghilu no ogpakasakit to goinawa to otow no ogpakarinog.
Nò, to magaan ogsalop ka allow, si Hisus woy ka sampulu woy darua no mgo hibatoon din nigpinnuu to lamisaan.
No to kanta no doromdom, nahan ta buwa ko maroyow ka sikan no mgo batasan dan to pog-ampu su ogpoomotan ka pogsimba ran. No ogdoisokon dan woy ogbaybayaran dan ka mgo lawa ran. Dokad di, waro pulus to sikan no oghimuon dan. Ian su ka otow no ogtuman to sikan, kono ogkabuligan ka goinawa rin su ogkaayat dod sikandin to mgo koiniatan to lawa rin no ogpakasalo dod.
Pamminog kow mgo sulod ku, to ignangon ku kaniu. Ka soini no maroyow no nangnangonon no ignangonnangon ku kaniu, kono no ka otow ka ogligkatan.
Ka otow no ogbibigut, ogkabuì ko og-o-obul on ka hapuy.
Nò, ligkat to sikan no poghogot to Magboboot to sikan no innangon din ki Hisus, ogkataga kid on to sikandin ka igmalogot to ogkabogayan ki to soini no madmaroyow no sabut to Magboboot.
Nig-inso ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus kandin ko nokoy ka kalitukan to pananglitan din.
Pogkaponga, inhatod to kapitan ka balubato dio to igbuyag to mgo sundalu. Kagi to kapitan to, “Si Pablo no napirisu, nig–umow kanak woy impahatod din ka soini no balubato kai to koykow su duon ignangon din koykow.”
sagman
Ian su waro otow no ogkohimu on no maroyow dio to tangkaan din ligkat to pogtuman din poron to Balaod to Magboboot, su ka Balaod din ka ogpakabat-ow kanta to nakasalo kinow on kandin.
Du-on otow no maga-an oggoram to buò no ogko-opuk no moirap to oggoinawa.
Sikan ian to nan–alap dan ka mgo malotoy no dio dan ipohibat to mgo hibatanan, mgo ikam no impanabuk dan dio to mgo dalan to lunsud oyow ogkabayaan to alung ni Pedro ko ogligad no ogkoulian on.
tambuku
To natuman on ka igkohon-om no bulan to igkaboros ni Elisabit no nigsugu to Magboboot ka sagboka no mgo suguanon din no diwata oyow oghondio to lunsud to Nasarit. Ka ngaran din, si Gabriel.
Ka otow no oggulay to tubod, ogkagud to niug no iggatà din.
Sikan ian to tagood to kai kinow pad to tano, ogpakasalig ki to Magboboot no kono ki ro ogsalig to ogkakitaan ta.
Sikan ian to nataga kid on to nig-un-unawa kinow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot ko Hudiu ki woy ko kono ki no Hudiu, ko uripon ki woy ko kono ki no uripon, ko lukos ki woy ko boi su tibo kinow, nohimu on no sagboka ro ka lawa ta ki Hisu Kristu.
No ogkounawa rod ka Magboboot su to nohimu ka sikan no insabut din, immalogot din to sikan no igpangulibot din. Ian su oyow ka mgo otow no ogpakapurut uromo to sikan no insabut, ogkataga lagboy to kono ian ogkahalin ka tuud din.
Ka dangob pad. “Ko ogsasindog ka no og-ampu, ko maroot so goinawa nu dio to agad hontow, pasaylua nu sikandin woy ka og-ampu to Magboboot. Iling ka oyow songo ogpasayluan ka to Amoy nu no Magboboot no og-ugpo dio to langit.”
Soini ka igpohitaga kanta ko hondoi no nangnangonon ka tu-tuu ian no ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot. Ka ignangon to si Hisus ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan no ogkohingaranan ki Kristu, lagkos to ignangon to tu-tuu ian no otow si Hisus su nigkuwo to lawa no nig-un-unawa to lawa ta, tu-tuu ian to dio nigligkat to Magboboot.
Nò, duon mgo talag-anad to Balaod dan no nigdinog to kagi ni Hisus no kagi ran kandin to, “Maistru, maroyow ka kagi nu no intabak nu to mgo otow.”
No ka tibo no mgo otow no nakakita, dakol ian ka ingkoinuinu ran no nigsayo dan on ka Magboboot to kagi ran to, “Duon nokouma kanta no mabogbog no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot,” woy kagi ran dod to, “Nighondini ka Magboboot oyow ogpangabangan ki no mgo otow rin.”
bugal
pamawoy
lukos
Ka tibo no mgo igkasasow ta igsalig ta to Magboboot su sikandin ka ogtanudtanud kanta.
hinu-un
Nò, kuntoon,” kagi ni Pablo, “ogpabuligan ku sikaniu to Magboboot woy to sikan no kinagian din no igpohitaga to sikan no dakol no igkohoy–u din kanta su ian ka ogpokohogot to pogtuu now woy ogpakabogoy kaniu to mgo karoyawon no igtagad to Magboboot to tibo no mgo otow no ogpasakup kandin.
dakol
Tibò ayam du-on agasan di ka manuk, warò su kai to kiliran ka pa-a ran.
tangkò
sudsud
songol
No pogkalugoy, nan–alap dan on ka mgo bokog dan dio to kandan no ugpaan to Sikim. No inluglug dan to sabalanan no nigboli ni Abraham dongan to mgo anak ni Hamor.
Di duon dod oghimuon now no maroyow ku su ka mgo maroot no oghimuon to mgo otow no oghingaranan no Nikolaita no maroot lagboy to goinawa ku, songo immaroot now to kaniu no mgo goinawa.
ogka-ayun
bino-bò
No songo pigsugu a to Gimukud to Magboboot oyow ognangonan ku ka mgo otow to nokouma on ka allow no ogpangabangan din ka mgo koot-otawan din.”
Nataga ka,” kagi, “to mgo sugu: ‘Kono ka ogpanlibug. Kono ka ogpanakow. Kono ka oghimatoy. Kono ka og-uubat ko ogtitigus ka. Tahura now ka inoy nu mgo amoy nu.’ ”
bulang
pugnut
Ian su duon allow uromo no nig–indanan to Magboboot no ogbobootan din on ka tibo no mgo otow kai to kalibutan. Ian su duon Otow no pig–alam din no si Hisus. No ogmatularong lagboy ka pogboboot din to tibo no mgo otow. No ian din impohitaga dio to tibo no mgo otow to ogkohimu on uromo ka soini no ignangon ku kaniu su nig–uyag on to Magboboot si Hisus ligkat to kamatayon din.”
powipowi
Du-on uran no ogngaranan noy no saginwalu.
Og-awoson to ogkasagboka ro ka goinawa ta ka nigtuu ki Hisus. Kono ki ogparakoldakol to duma ta, di ogdumaruma ki to mgo otow agad malintok so ngaran dan. Kono ki ogsumansuman to madmaroyow ki kandan.
Tagbarubu
bagdak
dala-ot
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ko ogpokouma on ka allow to ogbobootan to Magboboot ka tibo no mgo otow kai to kalibutan, ka dongan woy ka kuntoon pad no mgo otow, ogpakaamut ka labow no igbuyag no boi dongan ligkat to songo ugpaan dio to natamanan kai to kalibutan. Ogsonditan din on su dongan, mariu ka ighipanow rin no nighondio to lunsud to Hirusalim su ogpamminog to natouan no kagi to Labow no Igbuyag no si Solomon. Nò, nigpamminog sikandan to kagi ni Solomon di kuntoon, duon on kai to kaniu ka labow pad lagboy ki Solomon di waro kow mogtuu ka innangon din kaniu.
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Ognangonan ku sikaniu, agad kon-u, waro otow kai to kalibutan no labow pad ki Huan no Talagbautismu. Di sikan no otow no doisok do ka katondanan din, labowlabow pad sikandin ki Huan dio to Pandatuan to Magboboot dio to langit.
Babagukbuk ka lumansad, ko ogpambukal ka pakpak.
No tongod to sikan no Balaod, marani ogkatibo no ogkalinisan to langosa. No ko waro langosa no ogtulalug, kono ogkapasaylu ka mgo salo.
tikang
lipong
Ko du-on igmasakit so goinawa, du-on igkasawò din to nigkagian sikandin to masakit so goinawa.
Kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Ayad-ayad kow no kono kow ogkagawayan to agad hontow.”
Naroromdom ni Pedro ka intunlun ni Hisus no kagi rin ki Hisus to, “Maistru, pitow ka; nagangu on ka sika igira no kayu no natunlunan nud.”
Pogkaponga, nighutuk nig–untud si Pablo no nigligkat koy on man do. Di su kono koy ogpakasungalngal to kalamag, dio koy on makabayo to limang to pulu to Sipri no kaalindungan.
Na-angol-angol ki pad. Ko sikanami, warò pad katagaan ta. Warò ki pad makabatuk to maroyow no dalan.
Ka woig no Liboganon, pigponong su oyow du-on igwoig to basakan.
Ian su, ko duon otow no ogpakasabut on tongod to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu no ian Talagpangabang, woy nakaawo on poron to mgo maroot no batasan din kai to soini no kalibutan no ogpakaraat to iam no pogkouyag dan, di ko ogpakatood sikandan no ogkaayat no oglibongan dan ka tahan no pogkouripon dan to maroot no mgo batasan, momohirap pad ka mohuri no ogkoumaan dan.
pusù
luas
bonok
tu-od
maniò
Duon sagboka no otow to mgo Parisiu no intugun din ki Hisus to oyow dio ogkoon to kandin no baloy. Nighondio si Hisus woy nigsolod on to baloy to Parisiu woy nighibat to kilid din dio to ogkoon.
Nigpugad koy poron to mangayow.
Di si Hisus atag no nig–uyag on to Magboboot ligkat to kamatayon din, waro atag mamolu ka kandin no lawa.
Duma to ignangon dan, pigsugu dan ka mohon-ing no mgo busow duon to lawa to mgo otow no narogil on. Ka dangob, nighidhiran dan to molintok no lana ka ulu to mgo otow no duon sakit no nabawian on sikandan.
katupis
Oggopoton ta ka igpantukog to kalasag oyow ogmarigon.
Ka mgo otow no kono ogparoog ki Satanas woy ogtuman to kanak no ogkoiniatan taman to kamatayon dan, ogbogayan ku sikandan to katondanan to oyow ogpakalagkos kanak to pog-alap ku to mgo dakol no ugpaan kai to tano. No ka katondanan dan, mabogbog lagboy no ogkoiling to sikan no imbogoy to Amoy ku kanak su ogkounawa to putow no ogpakagopang to kuron su waro ogpakaroog kandan. Woy songo ogbogayan ku sikandan to igkarago dan no ogkounawa to kalayag to buntatalo.
atuk
Di ka suguonon no waro mataga to igkoiniat to igbuyag din no songo duon hinimuan din no litos poron to ogkabarasan sikandin, kono do amana atag ka igkabaras kandin to igbuyag din. Ka otow no ogbogayan to dakol, songo dakol ka pog-iman dut igbuyag din no ig-uli kandin. Ka otow no ogbogayan to subla pad to dakol, songo subla pad to dakol ka pog-iman dut igbuyag din no ig-uli kandin.”
sigpul
duon nabayaan din no otow no pinanganak ni Israil no nabaybayaran to otow no taga Ehipto. No nigpangabangan ni Moisis ka otow no nabaybayaran woy pighimatayan din on ka taga Ehipto.
tikos
Kohop-atan no allow no wa nigkoon si Hisus, no pogkaponga niggutasan on lagboy sikandin.
bulutut
Nò, ian noy ro igsulat kaniu ka ogkabasa now woy ka ogkasabutan now. No ogkoiniatan ku ko lagboy now ogkasabutan ka waro now pad amana masabuti tongod to mgo oghimuon noy. Ian su oyow ko ogpokouma on ka allow to poglibong to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu dii to tano, ogkohimu no ogkarago kow kanami unawa to songo ogkarago koy kaniu.
Ka mgo manukmanuk ogdapù to mgo bogas to kayu.
Di ko ogpaboot ki to Gimukud to Magboboot, ogdakolon ta ka goinawa ta to duma ta, ogkarago ki, ogmaawang ka goinawa ta, ogmalayaton ka goinawa ta to duma ta woy ogkohoy-uan ta, woy ogmaroyawon ta ka mgo batasan ta woy ogkasaligan ki.
pamalas
sapù
laklakaan
No ka mohon–ing no mgo otow no nalimud, songo nigbulig no ogbayung on ki Pablo daruwa ki Silas. Nò, ka mgo pogbuyagon, pigdalagmit dan on to nigpous–us ka mgo kinabo ni Pablo daruwa ki Silas oyow ogkawaswasan on ka lawa ran woy nigpabarasan.
pulus
Ogkounawa rod kanta no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu. Agad mohon-ing kinow no otow, sagboka ro ka lawa ta no nasagboka kinow on ki Hisu Kristu. No tibo kanta, ogkounawa to lawa ta no nigmasumsumpuloy.
Nò, to pogkouma noy dio to ugpaan to Masidonia, waro himolayan noy su agad hondoi koy makatangko, duon igkasasow noy. Duon mgo otow no nig-ogot kanami woy duon pad ingkasasow noy to mgo otow no nigtuu.
Nig-angayan din on ka gabas no in-ulì din on kanak.
sugsug
tugkol
Nigsugud ka.
higtok
Nò, sikanta no nigtuu no songo oghingaranan to Magboboot no mgo anak din, otow ki ro, no duon mgo sapu, mgo langosa to soini no lawa ta. Sikan ian to nig-unawa ka lawa ni Hisus to kanta no lawa no ogkohimu no ogkamatoy. Ian su oyow ligkat to kandin no pogkamatoy, ogkaawo on ka katondanan ni Satanas no ogpakaalap poron kanta dio to kamatayon.
Sikan ian to nigmaroyow on ka goinawa ran tibo no songo nigkoon on.
pudpud
Nakali-us ka magaliug to wà ki kai’t baoy.
Ka ogngaranan no talabubung, ka tagbanua no og-ugpò to bubungan, balitì, dalama, sampow. Ka sikan, karumaan to mgo busow.
dabu
lugom
Pogkalugoy,” kagi ni Istiban, “to ogmarani on ka allow no ogtuman to Magboboot ka impanoy din insabut ki Abraham, no nigmohon–ing on ka mgo pinanganak ni Hakub no dio to Ehipto.
pulondag
bala-awan
Nigkagi man do sikandin to, “Isulat nu ka soini no igpaalap nu dio to sikan no suguanon ku no ogtanudtanud to mgo otow no nigtuu to Magboboot no dio to lunsud to Laodisia. Soini ka kagi no igsulat nu, ‘Ka soini no kagi, ogligkat kanak no oghingaranan to Talagmalogot. Woy sikanak dod ka ogkasaligan woy tu-tuu ian ka igmalogot ku. Woy sikanak ka impohimu to Magboboot to tibo to soini no kalibutan woy ka dio to langit.
porò
ongil
Ogkasandigan to sikan no igkanangon su ogkatuon ka maroot no ingkoholos dio to goinawa rin. Nò, ogpakaluhud on sikandin no og-ampu to tangkaan to Magboboot no ogpakasayo on kandin woy ogpakanangon sikandin to “Tu-tuu ian to duon kai ka Magboboot to kaniu.”
Mgo sulod ku to pogtuu ta ki Hisus, nataga kow to nakatood koy to tuud noy to nighondio koy to kaniu
lungang
guliguli
Nig-agow ka ba-ad no tanò ku.
Malogot ka kagi ku kaniu to agad hondoi to soin no kalibutan no ognangonnangon ka mgo otow to Maroyow no Nangnangonon, songo ignangon dan ka nighimu to soin no boi koddi oyow ogkaroromdoman sikandin to mgo otow.”
tigus
Di sikan no mgo otow no maroyow ka oghimuon dan, ogpabat-awan dan ka oghimuon dan oyow igpakita ran ka nighimu ran no insugu to Magboboot.”
No ogbogayan ki nikandin ko nokoy ka ogbuyuon ta su ogtumanon ta ka igsugu din woy oghimuon ta ka ogkoiniatan din.
Ko duon boi no ogtuu ki Hisus, woy duon dangob no boi no karumaan din no nabalu, og-awoson to sikandin ka ogbulig to sikan no karumaan din no nabalu no kono din poron igsalig to duma no mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus oyow ogkaayun dan no ogbulig to mgo balu no waro karumaan dan no ogkasaligan dan.
kalasagan no ibid
tu-u
No poglonghag ni Hisus dio to langit, noopuk sikandin no kagi rin to sikan lukos bahin to talinga rin mgo dilo din, “Ipapata” no ka lituk ian, “Ogkapulasan ka.”
Ko nigduma ran si Hisus dio, nigsundul ki Hisus si Simon Pedro woy ka duma no hibatoon din. Nakasolod ka sikan no dangob no hibatoon dio to lama to Labow to mgo Talagpanubad su nigtokod do to sikan no Igbuyag.
Ko duon pa indoisok to goinawa, kono no ka kanami no goinawa ka nigdoisok kaniu, di ka kaniu no goinawa ka indoisok kanami.
Og-arasan ki to kuddò no naruad no konò ogkabayaran.
butut
kalusisi
Ko ogtumanon now ka mgo insugu ku, ogpalinggalat kow to goinawa ku. Ogkounawa ian koddi,” kagi ni Hisus, “no songo pigtuman ku ka igsugu to Amoy ku koddi no omunaan nigpalinggalat ka goinawa rin dii to koddi.
“Mgo sulod, duma kow koddi su duon nakitaan ku no lukos no innangon din koddi ka tibo no pighimu kud. Sikandin on buwa ka Im-imanan tanow.”
Ko oghimu ka to bogyas, magalat. Magalat ka lawa to bogyas; magalat ka galow.
pamatang
paan
ubat
sikaniu
Nò,” kagi ni Hisus, “ko waro makabayad ka sika darua no otow to pig-utang dan, nig-awo on dut datu ka utang to sika darua no otow.” Kagi ni Hisus to tagbanwa, “Og-inso a koykow ko hondoi buwa to sika darua ka dakoldakol no goinawa rin to sika datu?”
kimud
Ko warad on otapon, ogsugboon tad on
Kagi to boi no no-ipong to iglukos din no mananoy niglopow, "Amana so barungusan nu ra no moko-ipong-ipong no otow."
Ogbuyu a to Magboboot oyow ligkat to dakol no kabogbogan din, ogkohogot on ka pogtuu now ki Hisu Kristu su ligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot no ogbulig to goinawa now.
Nataga a to agad kon-u no allow, ogpamminog ka koddi. Di soini ka kagi ku kuntoon su ka mgo otow kai oyow ogtuu to pigsugu a nud.”
Sikan ian, ka lukos no og-asawoon din on ka ogkoiniatan din no boi, maroyow ka pogboot din. Di ka otow no kono ogpangasawa, madmaroyow ka kandin no pogboot.
No nigpaagbot si Pablo to nigkagi to napogkot to, “Sasindog ka woy kotonga nud on ka paa nu. Inogo on no niglapognat nigsasindog woy nighihipanow on ka otow no napogkot.
og-ian
Nò, soini ka ignangon ku kaniu. Ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, waro mog-ol-olog sikandan to oghimu to batasan no ogpakamaroyow poron kandan dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, di nohimu on sikandan to maroyow dio to tangkaan din su ligkat to nigtuu on ki Hisu Kristu.
Duon Titu, innangon to songo otow no lagsoban no karumaan dan no taga Krita no nigkagi nokani to, “Ubaton ka mgo taga Krita woy mabulut. Pogulon sikandan di tungulon.”
Di nignangonan ku sikaniu to soini oyow ko ogkoumaan kow on uromo no ogkaroromdoman now ka soin no innangon ku kaniu.” “Wa kow nangoni to sikan no pogbunsud to pog-anad ku su duon a pad man no ogdumaruma kaniu.
Malogot ka ignangon ku kaniu to kono pad man ogkoubus ka tibo no mgo otow no nabuhi pad kuntoon woy ogkohimu ka ignangon ku kaniu.
utù
Kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandan, “Sakuga now; ihatod now dio to igbuyag to mgo suguanon to mangasawa.” Inhatod dan on dio to kandin
Si Kristu ka ogligkatan to soini no iam no pogkouyag ta. No ko oglibong sikandin kai to kalibutan, ogpakaamut kid on kandin, no ogkakitaan tad ka igbogoy rin kanta no karoyawon din.
Du-on kabogbogan to kilat su ogpakasilab to kayu.
Ka mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu dio to Hirusalim, nigsugu dan ka duma no mgo talagpanubad, mgo Libita to oghondio ki Huan oyow og-inso ki Huan ko hondoi nigpuun ka kandin no katondanan.
Di ka kagi to Magboboot, kono ogkaawo taman to waro katamanan.” No ka sikan no kagi to Magboboot, ian ka ingkaanad kaniu.
koyuyung
Ka kawaan woy hop-at no pogbuyagon no ogpinpinnuu dio to mgo pinnuuanan dan to pogboboot duon to tangkaan to Magboboot, nanluhud to ogsimboon dan ka Magboboot. No nigkagi sikandan to,
Oglimposug ka batò.
Di sikaniu,” kagi, “kono now unawoi. Og-awoson now atag, ko hontow kaniu ka inat no oglabow, og-awoson din no ogdoromdomon to goinawa rin to ogkounawa sikandin to hari now,” kagi ni Hisus. “No ka igbuyag to kaniu no nigtuu koddi, og-awoson to ogkounawa ro sikandin to otow no suguonon to duma rin.
Ian su duon ingkasulat dongan ni Dabid tongod to kagi ni Hisus to, ‘Ungod ad ogtangko to Magboboot. No duon sikandin kai to kawanan ku no ogbulig kanak oyow kono ad ogkasasow.
Nigkagi si Huan to mgo otow to, “Balbalawi now ka goinawa now woy ongkori now on ka maroot no mgo batasan now su natuman on ka Pogsugu to Magboboot kai to tano.”
Nig-inso ka mgo Hudiu ki Hisus, “hondoi ka pighimu nu no kabolbolonganan no igpatuu to duon katondanan nu to oghimu to soini?”
Ka duma no mgo hibatoon dio to balutu nanluhud no nigsimba ki Hisus no kagi ran to, “Malogot ian no sikoykow ka Anak to Magboboot,” kagi ran.
Agad waro salo din, nigpasiporan woy niglogparan. Waro ogpakabatbat to pinanganak din su nighimatayan dan man.”
No duon otow no napulid ligkat to ingkabato din no pighonat to mgo duma rin. Allow–allow ran alapa sikandin dio to sikan no ampuanan woy dio dan ipohibat to gumawan no oghingaranan to Maroyow no Gumawan su oyow ogpakabuyu sikandin to salapi to mgo otow no ogmanligad no ogsolod to sikan no Dakol no Ampuanan.
Ka innangon ku no sikaniu do ka nigdinog, igbabansagon now dio to libuwasan. Woy ka in-anad ku kaniu no waro mataga ka duma no mgo otow, songo ignangon now to tibo no mgo otow.
ganlat
Sikaniu no mgo bato, paagad-agad kow to inoy now mgo amoy now su sakup kow on to Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow no si Hisus. No sikan ian ka litos no oghimuon now.
taga
Sikaniu, amoy now si Satanas woy ka goinawa now ian to oghimu to agad nokoy no igkoiniat din. Sikandin, tahan no talagbunu no nigbunsud ko iam pad mohimu ka kalibutan. Waro nigpaginlabot to kamalogotan su waro man dio to kandin ka malogot no kinagian. Ko og-uubat sikandin batasan din ian to ubaton woy sikandin ka ogligkatan to tibo no mgo ubat.
ukaba
Nig-abin a to sikan no otow; naan din no hari a rin.
U-uyuni nu ka kagi.
guma
Di ka Magboboot no ian matikang, kono ogkoologan to og-ugpo to baloy no oghimuon do to bolad to mgo otow. Ian su duon ingkasulat dongan to talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot. No nigkagi ka Magboboot to,
Natapid ka pog-alig din no du-on on dakol no goinawa rin. Ka sikan no alig, sagboka rò no boi ka indakoli rin. Sikan ka ligkatan to og-asawo-on din.
omonu
Waro malugoy no duon duma no mgo lukos no ogsasindog dio no nighondio ki Pedro. Kagi ran kandin to, “Malogot ian no songo duma ka woy ni Hisus su ka lagong nu, ogtokoron noy ro.”
Nò, ka Parisiu no nigpatugun ki Hisus, pogpitow rin to pighimu to boi ki Hisus, kagi to goinawa rin to, “Man naan poron ko talagnangon pa to kagi to Magboboot ka soin no lukos, ogtokoron din poron ko hontow ka soin no boi no ogpunas to paa rin to makasasalo no boi ian.”
kois
higup
Ka sika gabas, songo tu-id woy moko-ulì koddì su diò to Kapugi nigdolog.
Pogkaponga ni Pablo to innangonnangon rin, nanhipanow on ka mgo Hudiu, no malayat ka pogpaap–apuloy ran.
Koddi ka paan no ogbogoy to igkouyag to mgo otow.
logas
loplop
omot
Nigtabak si Natanial kuwo ki Hisus. “Buyag,” kagi rin, “Koykow ka Anak to Magboboot. Koykow ian ka Labow no Igbuyag to mgo taga Israil.”
Nò, duon mgo Hudiu woy ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu woy ka mgo igbuyag dan no nigmouy–uyunoy to ogbayadbayad woy ki Pablo no ogdogpakon dan poron sikandan to dakol no batu oyow ogkamatoy.
sil-ap
unug
Songo allow duon mgo bato no nigduma to mgo otow dio ki Hisus oyow igpasamsaman dan woy oyow og-ampuan din sikandan. Di nigsaparan to mgo hibatoon din ka mgo nigduma to bato.
agot-ot
Nò, sikan pad ka pigkagi ni Pablo no nigbabansagon si Pistu to, “Pablo, nalangog kad on su ligkat to nigsubla on ka natouan nu,” kagi ni Pistu.
puti
ugsul
liwan
No, nignangonan ni Hisus ka otow no noumil ka limang no bolad din to, “Kotonga nu ka bolad nu.” To inkotong din no nabawian on no nokog-unawa on to limang no bolad din.
Sikan ian to, ka mgo nigtuu, nigdagusu ran si Pablo to pinohipanow ran on. No dio nigbayo si Pablo to dalan no igtopak dio to dagat. Di si Silas woy si Timoteo, nig–ugpo pad duon to Biria.
dulug
Nig-unawa karakoli ka sikan no kamolung, sagboka woy tongà no pulgara ka kalayati.
kalkal
Ian su ian ingkohipanow ran su ogtuman ian to sugu din, woy su waro nigpurut sikandan to agad nokoy dio to mgo otow no waro nigtuu ki Hisus.
Nigsug-utan ki to atolug.
Ogtindukon ta to tinurù ka woig ko oglitoslitos dò ka initi rin.
langkob
No nig-un-unawa ka katikangi woy ka kaluagi woy ka kalayati rin. No ka diwata to Magboboot, ian din insokod to lunsud ka sosokoroy rin no bulawan. No daruwa no malan woy hop-at no gatus no kilumitru ka kalayati, woy ka kaluagi woy ka katikangi rin.
Nò mgo sulod, duon dod dangob no duma noy no sulod ta no ogparumoon noy ki Titu. Malasi noy nool-ologan sikandin no nakita noy to moomot sikandin to ogbulig to mgo nigtuu. No kuntoon, natimulan on ka pogkamaali din to ogbulig su dakol ka pogsalig din kaniu.
No ka kouyagan no waro katamanan, igbogoy rin dio to mgo otow no ogpoomot to oghimu to maroyow su ogkoiniat sikandan to karoyawon woy ka igsayo no igbogoy to Magboboot uromo kandan, woy ogkoiniatan dan ka kouyagan no waro katamanan no igbogoy rin kandan.
dul-ug
tigom
Ipapitow now ka pogparakdakoloy now to goinawa now no ogpakumkumustooy kow. Nò, maroyow ko ogmaawang doka goinawa now no nasagboka kow ki Kristu.
No nighingaranan on to Magboboot sikandin to Labow to mgo Talagpanubad no ogkounawa to pogpanubad ni Milkisidik dongan.
bitin
Ian su, ka mgo otow no waro naawo ka salo dan, nahan dan no waro pulus ka nangnangonon tongod to kamatayon ni Hisu Kristu no dio to krus. Di sikanta no ogkapangabangan to mgo salo, nataga kinow to ka sikan no nangnangonon, ian ka igpohitaga to Magboboot to kabogbogan din.
buabua
Ka Pogsugu to Magboboot, ian ogkounawaan ka sika malintok ian no boni to mustasa no dio ipamula to songo otow to kamot din. To nigtulin on, nohimu on no matikang no pinamula no duon on sugpang no nigsasalagan on to mgo manukmanuk.”
doromdom
Woy songo nataga kow on porom to, ka lukos no oghulid to boi no maroot ka batasan din, ogkasagboka on ka lawa ran. Ian su ogkounawa to impasulat to Magboboot dongan tongod to iam no alunggun. Kagi rin to, “Ogkasagboka ro ka lawa to sikan no daruwa.” Ian ka nasulat.
bukus
Songo kono kow ogpoumow to agad hontow to ‘Igbuyag’, su ka Igbuyag now ian sikoddi no Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan. Sikoddi do ian ka Igbuyag now.
Sin-okon a
Nataga kow to maroyow tibo ka batasan ni Hisus. No sikan ian to ogkatagaan ta ka otow no duon on dio to goinawa rin ka pogkouyag no ogligkat ki Hisus su layun on oghimu to maroyow.
bottolbottol
Omunaan no ka giboon to namatoy, nig-asawa rin ka boi no nabalu. Songo namatoy sikandin no wa pad nig-anak. Unawa rod ka nohimuan to sika igkararua woy ka igkatatolu no hari taman no noubus on no nig-asawa ka papitu no patalahari to sikan no boi. Tibo sikandan namatoy no waro pad ian anak dan. Bali naan, songo namatoy ka boi no nabalu.
Du-on otow no niggulò to dakol no ngalap no no-utol to namyala.
Kagi to mgo hibatoon din kandin, “Buyag, pila no allow no pigligad no pigdogpaka ka porom to mgo Hudiu! Nò, oglibong ka rod naan dio?”
toù
pigsò
sudsud
sugkal
[Ka abu-on,] konò amana no mapotì; ogsolug.
taloy-u
“Koy-u kaniu porom,” kagi ni Hisus, “oghimu kow to mgo maroyow no sabalanan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan no sikan no mgo talagnangon, sikandan ka nanhimatayan to mgo kaap-apuan now.
No su dakol ka goinawa noy kaniu, noiniatan noy to ognangonnangon kaniu to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon no nigligkat to Magboboot. Di kono no sikan do, di niglitos to goinawa noy to oyow, ko nig-awos, nigbalagad noy on poron ko ogkabaybayaran koy oyow ogpakatood koy no ognangonnangon kaniu tongod ki Hisu Kristu su dakol ian ka goinawa noy kaniu.
Og-alam a to baloy no mamalu-ag ko warò otow no og-ugpò
Agad to kono ad ogpasugu to agad hontow di nigboboot ad to oyow ogkohimu a no talagbulig to tibo no otow. Ian su oyow ogkabaghotan ku sikandan oyow mohon-ing ka ogtuu oyow ogkapangabangan ni Hisu Kristu.
Ko warad on ka inumanon dan, nigkagi to inoy ni Hisus ki Hisus. Kagi rin, “Warad on ka inumanon dan; noubus on!”
Amana sikaniu no kono ogkasaligan. Nataga kow poron ko og-unug ki to batasan to mgo otow no waro nigtuu, ogkabalabagan ta ka goinawa to Magboboot. Sikan ian, agad hontow no ogkoiniatan to og-unug to batasan to mgo waro nigtuu, ogkousigan dan ka Magboboot.
No agad nokoy ka ogkabayaan ta, ungod ta ogpasalamatan ka Amoy tanow no ka Magboboot. No og-awoson to, ka pogpasalamat ta, ogligkat to pogsalig ta to ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu.
gugud
liporong
Nig-angayan din on ka gabas no in-ulì din on kanak.
Ka Magboboot no Amoy, kono ogboboot ka agad hontow. Imbogoy rin koddi no Anak din ka malogot no katongod din to ogboboot
Agad to mamalintok ka ngaran ku to tibo no duma no mgo nigtuu, di nohoy-uan a to Magboboot. Ian su sikanak ka nigsaligan din to ognangonnangon kaniu to duon karoyawon no kono ogkasokod no ogligkat ki Kristu no igbogoy rin kaniu no kono no Hudiu.
Kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Nakitaan kud si Satanas no ian igbuyag to mgo busow no noulug on nigligkat to Langit su naroog on. Unawa to kilat no nigligkat dio to langit ka pogkoulug din.
“Di kono no ian igpasabut ku to duon ka agad sagboka no otow no nigkita rin ka Amoy ku no Magboboot. Sikoddi do ka nigkita to Amoy su dio a nigligkat kandin.”
Ogpan-agow to asawa to songo otow.
Ogkounawa kaniu, su ko ogkagi kow ro to kinagian no kono ogkasabutan, ogmonuon to mgo otow to ogkataga ko nokoy ka ignangonnangon now? Ogkoiling do to kalamag no ogligad do.
Di nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Sikaniu porom ka ogpakoon kandan.” Kagi ran, “Otowoy naan do! Oghondio koy buwa to lunsud oyow ogboli koy to paan dan no bali darua no gatus no putow no salapi oyow igpakoon kandan!”
Ka otow no ogkabolù, ogdomot no og-usigon din ka duma rin.
Di ligkat to pogkohoy-u to Magboboot kanta, nohimu kinow on no maroyow dio to tangkaan din su ligkat ki Hisu Kristu no nigbalukas kantanow no makasasalo.
Mgo sulod no indakoli ku to goinawa, sikan ian to ogbuyuon ku sikaniu oyow oghirosonan now on ka pogtuu now to Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow no si Hisu Kristu. Ungod a ogkasampot kaniu, no sikaniu ka ligkatan to igkarago ku woy sikaniu rod ka ogkasayo ku.
kayas
salò
Waro agad hontow no ogpakaboot to kamatayon ku; koddi ka ogboot. Duon katondanan ku to ogboot to ogpakimatoy a woy duon katondanan ku to ogkohutuk a ogkootawi. Soini ian ka insugu to Magboboot no Amoy ku koddi.”
buntol
Woy ogdomdomon ta ka mgo otow no dio to dakol no mgo lunsud to Suduma woy ka Gumura woy ka dio to mgo lunsud no marani kandan. Ian su songo noiling dod ka batasan dan to sikan no mgo diwata no makasasalo su maroot lagboy ka nanhimu to sikan no mgo otow. No agad lukos to boi, noiniatan dan ka kono no tahan no litos ta su nigmool-olinoy on ka mgo lukos to ogpanhilabot woy songo ogmool-olinoy ka mgo boi. Sikan ian to niglogparan sikandan to Magboboot dio to hapuy. No ka sikan, ogkohimu on no igbohog din to tibo no mgo otow no ogkalogparan din uromo to hapuy no kono ogkoobukan to waro katamanan.
Woy kono ki ogkabootan to agad hontow to oyow ogkalogparan ki su kono ki ogkalogparan ni Hisu Kristu su si Hisus ka nigpakimatoy no nigtobus to mgo salo ta. No pogkaponga, nouyag on. No pogkaponga man do, nabatun on no nabogayan on to katondanan din to ogpinpinnuu dio to kawanan to Magboboot. No duon on si Hisus no ogbulig kanta dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.
Nigtabak ka boi no kagi rin, “Warad, Buyag.” Kagi ni Hisus, “Songo kono ku ogbobootan sikoykow. Uli ka di kono kad oghutuk oghimu to salo.”
Ka bakotin, ogdugnalon ka susu oyow ogdakol ka gatas.
subung
hipanow
Nahan ku no sikoykow buwa ka taga Ehipto no nighimu to dakol no samuk nokani no niglimud to hop–at no malan no otow no og–atu to gobirnu no nig–alap din dio to holholawan.”
su igpakoon ku to magaliug ku no iam mogdatong koddi no waro igpakoon ku kandin.’ ”
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ka suguanon no nataga to igkoiniat to igbuyag din di kono ogpanagana woy kono din oghimuon ka ogkoiniatan to igbuyag din, ogbaybayaran to mohon-ing no lampos.
ma-awang ka goinawa
Ka gamak, dakol no pogpurut to ko-onon.
Ka pulus to sikan no otow no ogpamula woy ka ogpambus-ug to pinamula, og-uunawa ro. Di tag sagboka kandan, ogbogayan to Magboboot to litos to kandin no poghimu.
dampil
Kagi to sikan no igbuyag ki Hisus to, “Ligkat to bato a pad nigpaagad-agad a to sikan no mgo sugu.”
Du-on ogtutungon dan no ig-alang ka ig-awò to sikan no taloy-u.
No tongod to mgo otow no nig-abin to Magboboot no sakup din, waro otow no ogpakatood no ogbayung kandan su ka Magboboot ka nighingaranan sikandan to maroyow on dio to tangkaan din.
lagting
Ka dalan no kalasara no oghondiò to Sinuda, ungod ogbaliku-kù.
Kono ogpakapasakup koddi ka mgo otow ko kono oghun-a og-umow kandan to Amoy ku no nigsugu koddi dini. Agad ogpootawan ku ka sika mgo otow to sika mohuri no allow ta kai to soin no kalibutan.
anun
nipis
Ka pogtuu now to Magboboot, ogkounawa to igbogoy now kandin no igkarago din. No ko ogkoiniatan din to, ka kamatayon ku ka ogpakatimul to igbogoy ta kandin, ka sikan, ogkohimu on no igkarago ku lagboy su ogpakadalong a to igkarago now to pogtuu now.
Sikan ka pogbunsud to pogbatbat ni Hisus to mgo otow no kagi rin to, “Sunditi now ka goinawa now woy ongkori now ka mgo salo now su magaan on ka Pogsugu to Magboboot kai to soin no kalibutan.”
Nò, to nokog-akob-akob ka mohon-ing no mgo otow dio ki Hisus no nigkagi on si Hisus to, “Maroot lagboy ka mgo batasan to kuntoon no mgo otow. Ogkoiniatan dan to ogpitow to dangob no koin-inuan oyow ogkoindanan dan ko malogot ian to duon kabogbogan ku puun to Magboboot. Dokad di, waro duma no poindanan to Magboboot kandan ko kono no sikan do no noumaan dongan ki Hunas.
Ka manukmanuk, oglotulotu ko ogkatibò ka darua no pa-a rin to ogdi-ok no oghalinhalin.
Ka otow no og-iyow to babuy,  og-obu-an ka gotok su og-awo-on ka bituka rin
balanghuy
otob
lawig
Tigbal dò no a las dusi.
doow
dulopu
hawak
ligligon
Sikan ian no nig–awo on si Pablo to sikan no anaranan to mgo Hudiu no nighalin on dio to baloy ni Titu Hustu. Si Titu, tahan no og–ampu to Magboboot. Ka baloy rin, nokoglongod do to sikan no anaranan to mgo Hudiu.
sagdok
Di si Marta, nasasow su mohon-ing ka oghimuon din no igpanagana to magaliug. Nigdulug si Marta ki Hisus no kagi rin ki Hisus to, “Buyag, waro buwa goinawa nu koddi to ogbalagaron ad to hari ku no kona a ogbuligan to ogpanhonat to mgo magaliug? Nangoni nu kun pa bag ka hari ku su ogpabulig a pad.”
Nig-uma so bitil.
Pogkouma ran dio ki Hisus, kagi ran, “Si Huan, no Talagbautismu, kandin ka nigsugu kanami dini to koykow su oyow og-insaan ka ko sikoykow buwa ian ka innangon din no igbuyag no igpohondini to Magboboot woy ko duon pad loin buwa ka ogtagaran noy?” kagi to mgo hibatoon ni Huan.
Mgo sulod, ian do kono ogpakasabut to sikan no in-anad noy no Maroyow no Nangnangonon ka mgo otow no ogkalogparan to waro katamanan.
Ko du-on problima ku, konò a ogkasipod to og-aku no ognangon to ogpabulig a
No duon insulat to sikan no igbuyag to sundalu. No kagi to sulat to:
kaliawan
Songo ogpapangumusta a ki Pilulugu, si Hulia, si Niriu, woy ka atoboy rin, woy si Olimpas, woy ka duma ran no songo nigtuu ki Hisus.
Lanow ka so-ni no warò oglibuason to woig.
Ogguguran ku sikaniu to so-ini no nangnangonon.
Pogkaponga to sikan, nigkita kud ka mohon-ing on ian lagboy no mgo otow no kono ogkasool to agad hontow. Sikandan, nigligkat to agad hondoi no mgo otow woy to agad hondoi no mgo kapunganan woy to mgo ugpaan, woy to tibo to agad hondoi no mgo kinagian. Nanhasindog sikandan dio to tangkaan to sikan no pinnuuanan to pandatuan to Lagboy no Igbuyag woy dio to tangkaan to Nati no Karniru. Tibo kandan, nangikinabo to mamaputi woy nangomkom sikandan to pakow no ogkoiling to dohun to niug.
putut
Nasubid nokani.
balukas
sig-ang
lalung
Ko nigbogoy to sulat, nigpatimul to nangon no igpasiguru no ogpasabuk bag to agoloy.
labog
Kandin ka Gimukud to Magboboot no ogpasabut kaniu to malogot bahin to Magboboot. Kono ogpakatinawo kandin ka mgo otow no wa nigtuu koddi kai to soin no kalibutan su kono ogpakakita kandin woy su waro dan tokora kandin. Di sikaniu, ogtokoron now ro su og-ugpo man kai to goinawa now no kono ogkaawo.”
Kagi ni Hisus to mgo hibatoon din, “Hondoi naan ka pogsalig now koddi?” Di nahallok ka mgo hibatoon din woy dakol ka igkoinuinu ran no nigmoin-insooy no kagi ran, “Hontow naan ka soin no lukos? Agad ka kalamag woy ka luwak, ogkasaparan din do.”
bagkos
Waro do malugoy no nalimud man do nighutuk ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus. Duon buwa songo gatus woy kawaan no mgo otow no nan–amut. No nigsasindog on si Pedro.
Kagi to sika lukos, “Buyag, ogtuu ad on koykow.” Nò, nigluhud dio to tangkaan ni Hisus no ogsimba kandin.
lingow
agobuku
haud
Ogkagi rin to ogkara-at ka homoy rin su konò ogko-ubus no oghilamonon.
Natibug ka pogtoì din.
Sikandin ka ogbulig to goinawa ta to tibo no ogkabayaan ta no igkabaybayari oyow songo ogpakabulig ki to goinawa to duma ta ko songo duon kandan no igkabaybayari. No ian ta igkabulig kandan ka sikan dod no imbulig din to kanta no goinawa.
Ka anggam ku, nigpatu-on ko hondo-i ogkamot.
pu-un
sagil
di kagi to inoy to bato, “kono ku su ian ighingaran ku kandin, si Huan.”
iwil
Mohon-ing ka mgo otow no niggutasan no nabogayan to Magboboot to karoyawan, di mohon-ing ka mgo otow no naratu no nighipanow no waro mabogayi to Magboboot.
Oghalin a pad to songo ugpa-an.
ariplanu
Sikan ian ka duma no mgo otow, in-ulug dan ka botak do to salapi dan no dakol. Di sikandin atag, agad publi, in-ulug din pad ka tibo no salapi no noutol din no ian porom ka igkouyag din.”
Agad hontow otawa, ko dakoldakol ka goinawa rin to amoy din mgo inoy rin to goinawa rin koddi, kono no litos no sakup ku. Woy ko dakoldakol ka goinawa rin to anak din to goinawa rin koddi, songo kono no litos no hibatoon ku.
Pogkataga ni Hisus to kagi dut goinawa to sika mgo talag-anad woy ka mgo Parisiu, pig-inso din sikandan to, “Manio to ogtawad ka goinawa now?
kalitan
Pogkaponga to sikan, ka igkatolu no diwata, inbus-ug din ka tagu to kandin no boung dio to mgo woig woy dio to mgo sobsob. No tibo nambaluy no langosa.
Ka tibo no mgo ogpaag-agapoy, ogponoron dan ka lawa ran to tibo no oghimuon dan. No ian su oyow ogpakapurut porom to kogos no igtangkulu no nohimu ro duon no mgo dohun no magaan do ogkaraat. Di sikanta atag, ian to ogpoomotan ta ka pogtuman to ogkoiniatan ni Hisus su oyow ogkabogayan ki to igdasag kanta no kono ogkaawo to waro katamanan.
No ka tahan no nigdumaruma kandin nokani ligkat to Galilia taman to nokouma on sikandan dio to Hirusalim no waro pad mamatoy sikandin, ian ka malasi pigpakita ni Hisus to lawa rin no nouyag on. No kuntoon, sikan dod ian no mgo duma rin ka ogpakapamalogot to soini no ignangonnangon noy to mgo otow tongod ki Hisus.
Ko ogdulu ka kayu, ogkapadpad ka doun ko ogkalamagon.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Duma kow woy pitow kow.” Nò, nigduma ian no nigkita ran ka datongan din. Nig-ugpo dio to kandin sikan no allow su mahapun on.
Pogkaponga to sikan, ka diwata to Magboboot no nigkita ku no nigsasindog dio to dagat woy dio to tano, nigkayow rin ka kawanan no bolad din dio to langit.
Kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Hondio kow to sika no lunsud kai to tangkaan ta. Ko pokouma kow ogkitoon now ka nohikotan no nati to asno. Ka sikan no nati, waro pad mounturi to otow. Hokara now woy tuyuka now dini to koddi.
Sagopon ka isdà.
Ko malasi ogpog-ogotoy ka mgo patalasulod no og-ugpo to sagboka no baloy magaan do ogpokogsuwoysuwoy on ka sikan no pamiliya no konad sikandan ogbulbuligoy.
Igtupak ku ka lotibon.
Di ko duon pa otow no ogpakatuman to tibo no Balaod to Magboboot no waro agad sagboka no salo din, kono poron og-awoson ka pogtuu rin woy ogkabogayan to kouyagan din no waro katamanan. Ian su duon impasulat to Magboboot dongan no kagi rin to, “Ka sikan no otow no ogtuman to tibo no Balaod to Magboboot, ogkabogayan to kouyagan no waro katamanan.” Ian ka kagi rin.
tongos
Duon nigdinog noy to duon mgo otow no nighondio to kaniu ligkat kai to kanami, no pigsasow ran sikaniu to sikan no in–anad dan no nakatalap kaniu. Di waro noy sugua sikandan.
Ian su duon impasulat to Magboboot dongan. Kagi rin to, “Duon mgo otow no ogsuguon ku kaniu no kono no duma now no Hudiu su ogpakakagi kaniu to loinloin no mgo kinagian. No ian to oyow ogkanangonan kow ran to igpanangon ku. Di agad naan, kono kow rod ogpamminog, kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.”
Nò, su nigtuu si Abraham, ka mgo otow no songo ogtuu, songo ogpakalagkos to pogkohoy-u to Magboboot ki Abraham.
No songo ogkounawa rod kuntoon su songo duon dod baad no mgo otow no pinanganak ni Israil no nig-abin to Magboboot no sakup din su ligkat to nohoy-uan din sikandan.
Soini ka mgo ngaran to minuna ni Hisu Kristu. Pinanganak sikandin to igbuyag dongan no oghingaranan ki Dabid. Woy si Dabid pinanganak ni Abraham.
Woy ligkat to nighimu ni Hisu Kristu no ian Talagpangabang kanta, lagboy impasolod to Magboboot ka Gimukud din kai to kanta,
bugsung
sugilon
Og-uwang-uwangon ka mgo lawa ran.
Dokad di, woy ku ro oghohonduon ko igbogoy nu pad ian kanak su kono a ogkoiniat no ogkapogos ka no ogkohoy-u kanak su ian maroyow ku, ko ka igkohoy-u nu kanak, dio ian lagboy ogligkat to goinawa nu to ogbulig.
talosob
sakomit
pangabuggù
Ko ogkabaybayaran kow dio to dangob no lunsud, agpas kow awo dio, woy hondio kow to duma no lunsud. Ignangon ku kaniu to kono kow pad ogpokologob no og-anad dio to tibo no mgo lunsud to Israil no sikoddi no Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan, oglibong a kai.
tunlun
Ogkapanoy ka goinawa ta. Inat to du-on bohog tahan to goinawa ta.
Ka otow no du-on polak din, ogpakakagi sikandin.
batili
Un-unawa ka kagi to insulat dongan ni Isaias no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot. “Kagi to Magboboot, ‘Nò, ogpohun-oon ku koykow ka suguanon ku oyow kandin ka ogpanagana to dalan no ogbayaan nu.’
Di, kono a ogkasasow ko nokoy ka ogkagion now woy ko nokoy ka ogkagion to agad hontow tongod to pogtuman ku to igpohimu rin kanak, ko maroyow woy ko maroot. Agad ko kanak poron ka ogsumansuman to mgo hinimuan ku, kono ku ogkatagaan ko litos ka oghimuon ku.
Ian su, ka imbogoy to Magboboot kaniu to Gimukud din woy ko pighimu rin ka sikan no mgo kabolongbolonganan no impapitow kaniu, waro nigligkat to pogtuman now poron to Balaod, di nigligkat atag to nigdinog kow woy nigtuu kow on to sikan no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus.
No ogsimboon sikandin to tibo no mgo otow to soini no kalibutan no waro ikasulat ka ngaran dan dio to sulatanan to ngaran to mgo otow no ogbogayan to kouyagan no waro katamanan. Ligkat to waro pad nohimu ka soini no kalibutan, tahan on no ingkasulat ka ngaran dan to sikan no sulatanan to Nati to Karniru no nighimatayan nokani.
Nò, nigduma si Nikodimu ki Husi dio to krus. Si Nikodimu ka sikan no otow no nighondio ki Hisus ko marusilom. Kuntoon, nig-alap din ka kahop-atan no kilus woy lalimma no mohomut. Nokogsoogsoog on ka sikan no mohomut to oghingaranan dan to mira woy alows.
tukal
Ko nigdatong sikandan dio to Hirusalim nigsolod dan to Dakol no Ampuanan. Ko niglogoblogob no ogpitow to tibo dio to solod, niglibuwas no nigduma rin ka mgo hibatoon din no sampulu woy darua dio to Bitania su mahapun on woy magaan ogkatangkob ka allow.
Ko dakol ka katondanan to otow woy ko dakol ka katagaanan, ogngaranan to dakol no otow.
upa
Turu-turù ki ogpurut to boi ki.
Koon kow to mgo sapu to mgo igbuyag to mgo ugpaan, woy to mgo pogbuyagon to mgo sundalu, woy to mgo sundalu, woy to mgo ogpanguddo lagkos to kuddo dan. Woy koon kow to mgo sapu to mgo uripon woy ka kono no uripon, woy ka sapu to mgo otow no mabantug woy ka kono no mabantug.
tibag
porom
Nò, kagi ni Hisus “Manio naan no waro now masabuti no kono ka paan ka lituk to pananglitan ku ganna?” Kagi man do ni Hisus to, “Bantoy kow to igpatulin to paan to mgo Parisiu woy mgo Sadusiu.”
Andì, anupon ki bag ni Andì.
talung
mulò
“Kuntoon, maroyow ku to sikoykow, Buyag Agripa, ka ogpamminog kanak to igtabak ku to mgo igbabayung to mgo Hudiu kanak.
layud
kamansal
om-om
Ay-ayari now tantanuri ka mgo otow no nigtuu no igsalig to Magboboot kaniu. Og-awoson no ka pog-alap now kandan, kono ogligkat to ogkapogospogos kow, di og-awoson to ogligkat to lagboy no goinawa now to ogtuman to koiniatan to Magboboot. Woy og-awoson to kono no panalapi ka tuud now, di ka pog-alap now kandan, ogligkat to ogkoiniatan now ian no ogbulig kandan.
pa
Ogbuyu a to Magboboot oyow ogkohoy-uan din ka tibo no mgo otow no og-unug to soini no in-anad ku, woy to oyow ogbogayan din sikandan to maawang no goinawa. No sikan dod ka igbuyu ku no igbogoy rin dio to tibo no otow no ian tu-tuu no sakup to Magboboot.
Sikan no otow no nasalanganan dio to kamot din, awoson no konad og-uli no og-angoy to kinabo din.
lusuk
dugukan
Busbusa now ka agoloy no idapil now.
Sikan ian, ogparoromdomon ku sikoykow to oyow pamatbatuka nu ka goinawa nu to katouan nu no ingkabogoy to Magboboot koykow no nigtorongan ka to bolad ku no nig-ampuan ka nokani.
Nò, mgo sulod, tu-tuu ian no ungod koy ogpakatangko to kamatayon su ligkat to sikan no ignangonnangon noy kaniu. Di ligkat to sikan, ogkabogayan kow to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
bangkà
Ian su sikanak atag no si Pablo, magaan on ogkoitis ka langosa ku no igkabogoy to Magboboot, su ligkat to pogtuu ku ki Hisu Kristu, magaan a ogkoumoi to kamatayon ku.
su ogbootan kow pad to mgo maroot no koiniatan to goinawa now su duon dod mgo otow dio to kaniu no ogkoima woy ogpoog-ogotoy. No ka sikan, igpatokod to ogkabootan kow pad to mgo koiniatan now no ian batasan to mgo otow no waro nigtuu kai to soini no kalibutan.
dasig
Umawi a nu.
Nò, nighipanow si Huan no niglougloug dio to agad hondoi no ugpaan dio to marani to woig to Hordan no nignangonnangon to mgo otow to oyow ogbautismuan din on sikandan dio to woig to Hordan tongod to nigsonditan dan ka salo dan woy og-ongkoran dan on ka maroot no mgo batasan dan oyow ogpasayluon to Magboboot ka mgo salo dan.
Di woy nigbunsud si Hisus to kandin no pog–anad, nighunnaan on nangnangoni ni Huan ka tibo no mgo otow no pinanganak ni Israil oyow ogpabautismu on sikandan no igmalogot to ogsonditan woy og-ongkoran dan woy ogkoongkoran on ka mgo maroot no batasan dan.
Di si Saulo, nigparagas ka igkabolu din no ungod ogbabantak to ogpanhimatoy to mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisus. No nighondio sikandin to sikan no Labow no Talagpanubad to Dakol no Ampuanan dan no dio to Hirusalim.
Sikan ian, tagood to duon dod ka sikan no innangon to Magboboot kanta to duon himolayan no impanagana rin, og-awoson to og-ayad-ayad ki oyow waro agad sagboka kanta no kono ogpakatood no ogsolod uromo dio to sikan no himolayan.
sunù
Di to pogdatong din on kai to lunsud to Ruma, nigpoomot to nigpammitow a rin taman to nigkita a rin on.
Ko ogbulawan, maroyow ka layag din.
Ogkapulusan pad sikandan no duon kohoy-u ran to mgo duma ran su songo ogkohoy-uan sikandan to Magboboot.
Nigsumansuman ka sikan no amoy to sikan no oras ian no nignangonan ni Hisus sikandin to ogkouyag do ka anak din. Su sikan ian, nigtuu on ki Hisus ka sikan no lukos woy tibo no mal-alunggun.
Ko oglimudlimud kow no og-ampu, sagmana now ka mgo duma now su soini ka igtokod to ogmarakdakoloy kow.
sanggat
tinurù
Nakaluluud on su napogkot.
Duon to Tahan no Kasulatan to kinagian to Magboboot to duon uromo mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no ogkohimu on no maroyow dio to tangkaan din su ligkat to pogtuu ran kandin. Sikan ian to impanoy rin innangonnangon ki Abraham to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon no nigkagi ka Magboboot kandin to, “Ligkat to pogtuu nu kanak, ogkohoy-uan ku ka agad hontow kai to soini no kalibutan.” Ian ka kagi rin.
Nò, nigdakol on ka luwak to lanow su maagbot ka kalamag.
Nigdalapak on dio to kandin ka mgo Parisiu no duon ig-inso dan kandin oyow og-ol-ologan dan porom sikandin. Nig-inso dan to, “Ogkohimu to Balaod ta to ogkoongkoran to lukos ka asawa rin?”
Di tongod to mgo inotow-otow atag, nokoy poron ka lituk to kagi ku ko duon buwa pulus to sikan no ayam no igtubad dan to mgo inotow-otow woy ko duon buwa pulus to sikan no inotow-otow?
No waro a mataga ko manio ka oghimuon ku, su ka maroyow no oghimuon ku poron, kono a ogpakatood no oghimu, di ka kono ku poron no litos, sikan ian ka ogkohimu ku.
doromdom
No duon impapitow kanak no sagboka no dakol no kabolbolonganan no dio to langit. Woy duon sagboka no boi. Ian kinabo din ka allow woy nigsasindogan din ka bulan. No duon tangkulu to ulu rin no nigtaguan on to sampulu woy daruwa no mgo bituon.
Pogpurut to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to salapi, nigmanangnangonoy to, “Kono ta ogkatuman ka Balaod ni Moisis ko iglibong ta soin no salapi dio to taguanan to salapi dio to Dakol no Ampuanan, su soini ka igbayad to oghimatoy to otow.”
Ognangonan ku sikaniu, ko allow to iglogpad to Magboboot uromo, molmohirap pad ka iglogpad din to sikan no lunsud no waro mogtinawo kaniu to sikan no iglogpad din to mgo otow no nig-ugpo dongan dio to mgo lunsud no oghingaranan to Suduma woy Gumura.”
lakbang
gos-al
Nokoy ka litos no oghimuon ku? Og-ampu a rod to sikan no loinloin no mgo kinagian no insabuk to Gimukud to Magboboot to goinawa ku woy songo og-ampu a to soini no kinagian no ogkasabutan ta. Ogkanta a to sikan no loinloin no mgo kinagian woy songo ogkanta a to kanta no kinagian.
dalik
Nò, soini naan do, mgo sulod, ka igpanuguntugun ku kaniu. Balbalawi now ka mgo batasan now. Tantanuri now ka soini no imbuyu ku kaniu. Sagbokaa now ro ka goinawa now. No ko og-iling kow, ka Magboboot no ogligkatan to ogmarakdakoloy kinow to goinawa woy to maawang no pog-ugpo ta, ungod og-ugpo kai to taliwaro now.
Sikan ian, og-awoson ta to maroyow ka ogdoromdomon ta no ian ta ogkounawaan ka otow no ogngilam no kono tad og-ilingan ka mgo otow no ogpanhirogo,
Ogka-ana-ana ko ogga-ani oyow maga-an ogkaponga.
sug-ut
Di ko ogkasilaban on ka pighimu to songo otow, kono ogbogayan sikandin to igsayo. Di ogkapangabangan dod sikandin di ogkoiling to nasakomit no ligkat to hapuy oyow kono ogpakasugbuk.
pulù
Nò, nigsugu din ka mgo ogbaligya to salapati no duon to kulungan to, “Awaa now soini tibo. Ko now himua ka baloy to Amoy ku to palingki now.”
Kohoy-u kaniu no mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy mgo Parisiu. Patuutuu ro ka pogtuu to Magboboot. Nigdoroyow now ka mgo lobong to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no nammatoy sikandan dongan woy mgo lobong to mgo otow dongan no maroyow ka hinimuan dan.
sangkod
Nalugoy kow on nigtuu to Magboboot no sikaniu on poron ka litos no og-anad to mgo duma now tongod ki Hisu Kristu. Dokad di to sikaniu ro ian atag ka og-awoson to duon otow no og-anad man do kaniu no oghutuk to sikan no malomu ro no ig-anad to kinagian to Magboboot. No ian now ro ogkounawaan ka mgo bato no ogsusu pad no kono pad ogpakakoon to makogal.
Oghalin a pad to songo ugpa-an.
Ko du-on otow no ogpanumbaloy no ligkat to Kapalong, ogpatomu kanta diò to babalakan oyow ogpoko-untul to baloy ta oyow konò ogkalagaklagak.
Pogkouma ran dio ki Hisus, nigkita ran ka sika lukos no warad ka mgo busow to lawa rin. Ogpinpinnuu ro no nanginabo on no maroyow on ka doromdomon din to warad ka mgo busow. Di ka mgo otow, dakol ka igkallok dan.
Waro mataga to ogkoumaan on sikandan to kamatayon dan hantod to poglonop on no nalonod on sikandan tibo. Ogkounawa koddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan ko oglibong a uromo kai to tano, ogkatokawan sikandan su waro dan tuui no oglibong a kai to tano.
kabigtow ka goinawa
golong
Malogot ka soin no kagi ku kaniu to kona a oghutuk og-inum to soin no woig to ubas taman to og-inum a to iam no bino ko rio a to Pandatuan to Magboboot.”
Ka sukut, ian ka ogkubla to kuddò.
No sikan ian, agad hontow no og-iman-iman to poglibong ni Hisus, og-ay-ayaran din ka goinawa rin, mgo batasan din oyow waro maroot no ogpakasolod su og-unawoon din ka goinawa rin to goinawa ni Hisus no waro solug no maroot.
Ko nigdakol on, sikan ka matmatikang to tibo no igpamula to songo tuid. Ogsugpang on no litos to oglatunan to mgo manukmanuk dio to sugpang din no dio ogsasalag duon to ogkaholongan din.”
Ian su ka kamatayon ni Hisus ian din imbalukas kanta. Sikan ian, ian ta igpohimu to lawa ta ka maroyow oyow ogkasayo sikandin.
Kono su ig–alap now ka baloybaloy no pigtaguan now to inotow–otow no nighingaranan kow ki Molok no pig–ampuan now ka sikan no pighimu now no ogkoiling to bituon no nighingaranan now ki Ripan. Woy nigkagi ka Magboboot kandan to, ‘Sikan ian to ogdogilon ku sikaniu dio to madmariu to lunsud to Babilunia.’”
kulut
sopì
Nò nig-ongkoran on ni Hisus mgo hibatoon din ka mgo Parisiu woy nan-untud to balutu no nigparagas sikandan to oghondio to limang to lanow.
Inogo on no natokow ka mgo otow to duon daging no nigligkat to langit no ogkoiling to maagbot no kalamag no ogsolod on dio to baloy no niglimuran dan, no magulub on ka baloy.
Nig-inso ka mgo hibatoon din to, “Hondoi Buyag?” Nigtabak si Hisus, “Agad hondoi no duon namatoy, dio ian ogkalimud ka mgo daddakol no mgo manukmanuk no ogkoon to sapu to namatoy.”
Nighimatayan si Huan su nigsawoy rin si Igbuyag Hirodis. Kagi ni Huan ki Hirodis to, “Nakalop-ang ka to Balaod su nig-asawa nu si Hirodias.” Si Hirodis ka ipag ni Hirodias su asawa rin ka hari ni Hirodis no si Pilipi. Tongod to innangon ni Huan ki Hirodis, inparakop din si Huan no nigpabanggutan sikandin dio to pirisuan. Oghimatayan porom ni Hirodis si Huan di nahallok si Hirodis to mgo otow no Hudiu su natagaan dan no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot si Huan.
ligtuv
halisok
Di agad si Migil no mabogbog lagboy no diwata to Magboboot, waro niglangub to og-iling to oghimuon to sikan no mgo otow. Ian su dongan ko namatoy on si Moisis, nokog-ogot si Migil ki Satanas. No nigpaap-apuloy sikandan tongod ko hontow ka ogkuwo to lawa Moisis. Di waro doota ni Migil si Satanas no igpalogpad kandin, di nigkagi ro si Migil to, “Ka Magboboot no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ka ogsapad koykow.”
Di sikoddi, ignangon ku kaniu ka malogot do no ignangon. Sikan ian no kono now ogtuuan ka koddi no ignangon.”
Kò nu ipo-utang ka manggad
Ko oghinallokon kid to busow, an-anayan ogkagi to, “Mmm”. Takas sikan, du-on ogpati-ulug dii to tangka-an ta.
pola
Ian su nakaroromdom sikandin to, agad ko namatoy pa si Isaak, ogkouyag do to Magboboot sikandin. Di su waro din matoori to poghimatoy su nigpangabangan to Magboboot, ogkounawa to nig-uyag on ian to Magboboot si Isaak ligkat to kamatayon din.
in-uyag to Magboboot ki Kristu ligkat to kamatayon din. No pogkaponga, nigpapinnuu rin on si Hisus dio to kawanan din dio to Langit.
talosob
Ogtu-uron to otow to oghimu to lugì, unawa to katilias woy ko basuraan.
Ka bulbul din, maputi lagboy no ogkoiling to gapas. No ka mata rin, noiling to logdog to hapuy.
Ka insaluub din no kinabo, noolod to langosa. No ka nighingaranan kandin, “Ka Kinagian to Magboboot.”
logoy
Natiba-an natutung ka kamot?
Di nigbalikid si Hisus kandan no kagi rin, “Mgo boi no taga Hirusalim, kona a now sinagawi, di ian now atag sinagawi ka kaniu no pog-ugpo woy ka mgo anak now.
Nigtabak kandan no kagi ran, “Pinanganak koy ni Abraham. Agad kon-u, waro koy sugua to kono no duma noy. Manio to nigkagi nu to duon igpalipuas kanami? Nokoy ka kalitukan to soini?”
kawit
upì
Soin no igpan-anad now, ogpuun to mgo minuna now. Sikan ian ka waro now sagmana to kinagian to Magboboot. Mohon-ing ka oghimuon now no unawa to soini no batasan now no kono no litos.”
bulan
saloy
Igwilik now man bag kanak.
hina-at
na-an dò
buì
gu-os
Pigdinog ni labow no igbuyag Hirodis bahin ki Hisus su mabantug ka mgo pighimu ni Hisus. Duon dio ka mgo otow no kagi ran, “Nootawan on si Huan no Talagbautismu. Omunaan no dakol ka kabogbogan din to oghimu to mgo koin-inuan.”
Di nataga ki to ligkat dongan taman kuntoon, ka tibo no kalaglagan no nighimu to Magboboot, ogkabaybayaran. No ian ogkounawaan ka boi no ogpakaalooy su ogkabaybayaran ko og-anak.
Ian igmananoy ta to ogboli to wasoy su og-iling-ilingon ta ko du-on go-at.
Si Ugalinga ka inoy-inoy ran no ka asawa rin, songo amoy-amoy ran.
No nigparagas si Hisus to, “Sikan no otow no ogpasakup koddi, ogkounawa rod sikandin, pananglitan, to songo labow no igbuyag to dakol no ugpaan no ogkoiniatan din ka samuk dio to dangob no labow no igbuyag to dakol no ugpaan, woy rin pad ogbunsuri ka samuk ko ogmaal-alukuyoy pad to mgo duma rin oyow ogsumansuman ko og-aguantoon din dod ko pananglitan, sampulu do no libu ka kandin no sundalu, di kawaan no libu ka mgo sundalu dut dangob no igbuyag no ogtangkaan din.
lonoglonog
sinabong
Pangumustaa now ka tibo no mgo igbuyag now to dio to mgo ampuanan now woy ka tibo no mgo nigtuu to Magboboot. Songo ogpapangumusta kaniu ka mgo taga Italia no nigtuu.
Binayuon tanow ian.
doun
Nò, ligkat to nighimatayan si Estiban, nigbaybayaran on ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus, no nokogsuwoysuwoy on sikandan. No ka duma nokouma on to mariu no mgo ugpaan to Pinisia, woy ka Sipri woy ka lunsud to Antiokia. No agad hondoi makarolog, nan–alap dan ka kinagian to Magboboot. Di ka mgo Hudiu ro ka pignangnangonan dan.
Nò, su nabogayan a to katondanan ku to og-alap-alap to kagi rin, ognangon a kaniu to og-awoson now tibo to kono kow ogsumansuman to madmaroyow kow to mgo duma now. Di tongod to katouanan now, og-awoson to oglitoslitos do ka doromdom now no ogpakasokod to pogtuu now no imbogoy to Magboboot kaniu.
Pogkaponga, nig-inso ni Hisus to mgo otow to, “Manio,” kagi, “to ogkagi ka mgo otow to pinanganak do ni Dabid ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan?
Woy og-alapon kow nikandan dio to tangkaan to gobirnador woy mgo igbuyag su ogtuu kow koddi. Ko ogkoumaan kow on soini, ignangon now ka Maroyow no Nangnangonon dio to mgo Hudiu woy to mgo kono no Hudiu.
ta-ab
malanang so goinawa
Nò mgo sulod, nataga ki to duon mgo balaod ta no taman to ogkamatoy kinow on, ogpakapaagad-agad ki to sikan no mgo balaod. Di ko ogkamatoy kid, kono kid on ogpakatood no ogtuman to sikan no mgo balaod.
Pogkaponga, namang–awo on ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus to sikan bubungan no oghingaranan to Olibu no marani to lunsud to Hirusalim. Tigbal do no songo kilumitru ro ka igkariu.
Nakaso-ip kanak.
Ko ogpakatood on, ogkoumaan kid on to mohuri no allow kai to soini no kalibutan. No ogdoogon ni Hisus ka tibo no mgo talagsugu, ko otow woy ko busow, woy ko bantoy. Pogkaponga, igbogoy rin on dio to Magboboot no ian Amoy rin ka tibo no katondanan din to pog-alap to Pandatuan.
“No, ka sikan no igbuyag to sikan no sinaligan, agad maroot ka batasan to sikan no sinaligan din, nakasayo ka igbuyag din kandin su ogkatou ka sinaligan din to oghimu to pogpanagana to pog-ugpo din.” Kagi ni Hisus, “Ka mgo otow no waro pogtahud dan to Magboboot, sikan ka moiria no ogkatou to oghimu to panagana to pog-ugpo dan, di ka mgo otow no ogtahud to Magboboot, kono amana no moiria ko tongod to igpanagana ran litos to kandan no pog-ugpo uromo no dio to Langit.”
dukduk
lobog
gibang
Woy on nighagtong ka mgo otow no nigsaparan on to kunsial. Kagi rin kandan to, “Mgo sulod no taga Episu, tibo kinow man nataga to sikanta no taga Episu ka ogpokouyamu to soini no dakol no baloy no ampuanan ta ki Diana no mabogbog no magboboot ta. Woy sikanta rod ka ogpokouyamu to sikan no ogtahuron ta no batu no noulug no nigligkat to langit.
Pogdinog ni Hisus to napirisu si Huan no Talagbautismu, nighondio si Hisus to probinsia to Galilia.
Nalingawan now buwa ka in-udling to Magboboot kaniu no oghingaranan no mgo anak din. Kagi rin to, “Koykow no anak ku, kono nu ogdoisokon ka ig-anad to Magboboot kaniu. Woy maroyow ko kono ogkasundug ka goinawa nu ko ogkoogotan ka.
Nigtabak ka Igbuyag to, ‘Maroot ka nighimu nu. Pogulon ka no suguanon ku. Ko nataga ka naan to oggaani a to waro ku ipamula woy oggaani a to wa ku isawod,
binayu
Buus pad no manggad.
To tapus to Allow ran to Oghimoloy no magaan on ogkapawo ka allow to Dominggu nighondio to pilang no sabalanan si Maria Magdalina woy ka duma rin no songo oghingaranan ki Maria oyow ogpitawon dan ka sabalanan.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ka koonon ku ka pogpaagad-agad ku to igsugu koddi woy oyow ogkapongaan ku ka tibo no impohimu rin koddi.”
abu
logoron
Di ko ogkatuman on ka kono ogkaalang-alang, ogkaawo do ka sikan no tigbal pad no ogtagooran no kabogbogan no ingkabogoy rin.
Sikan no otow no duon dio to libuwasan to baloy rin, konad ogsolod dio to baloy rin oyow og-angoy to agad nokoy.
Nò, duon mgo Hudiu dio no ian hulingon dan to ogpanagpitsagpit dio to mgo lunsud no ogdogil to mgo busow no duon to lawa to mgo otow. Nig–ol–olog sikandan ko oghingaranan dan ka ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus no igdogil dan poron ka mgo busow. No kagi ran to, “Su duon katondanan to ngaran ni Hisus no ignangonnangon ni Pablo, ogdogilon noy sikaniu no mgo busow.”
Nig-inso to mgo hibatoon din to, “Hondoi ki ogkitaa to paan no litos to tibo soini no mohon-ing no mgo otow no mariu ki to lunsud?”
Nò ogpakanangon a to malogot ian to, ka imbogoy ran, kono do no ka ogkohimu ran, di nigpasublaan dan pad to ogkohimu ran. No ka sikan, nigligkat to kandan do no goinawa.
bangagon
Ka anugang ku, nighimu to sabut kanak to ogpananugang a to solod to songo tu-id ka pog-ugpò ku diò to kandin oyow ogpakabulig a to kandin no talabau.
Sikaniu no mgo boi no duon asawa, og-awoson now no ogpaagad-agad no igpariralom now ka goinawa now to asawa now. Ian su oyow ko duon asawa now no waro pad mogtuu to kinagian to Magboboot, songo kuwo buwa no ogpakatood dod no ogtuu ligkat to ogpakakita sikandan to kaniu no batasan no maroyow, agad ko waro kagi now no igparinog kandan.
Di nigpangabangan sikandin to tano su nigpanggintaang no nigsonop on ka dakol no woig no imbugwak to sikan no ulod.
Ka Gimukud to Magboboot no nigligkat ki Kristu, nig-ugpo to goinawa to sikan no mgo talagnangon dongan woy impohitaga rin kandan to duon uromo igkabaybayari ni Kristu. No ko ogkapongaan on ka igkabaybayari rin, ogbogayan sikandin to dakol no ngaran. Nig-ol-olog ka sikan no mgo talagnangon oyow ogkabatukan dan poron ko kon-u ogkatuman ka sikan no impanoy ran inangon woy ko songo monu ka karoyawon no igkasayo kandin uromo.
Nigpoin-insooy ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy ka mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu no nalimud dio. Ogpamangho sikandan ko duon litos no igbayung dan ki Hisus oyow ogpohimatayan sikandin.
Tu-tuu ian no dakol ka pulus ko ogpasakup ki to Magboboot ko ogkalitos do to goinawa ta agad malintok ka pog-ugpo ta.
Ko duon ogbogoy kanta to maroot, og-awoson to waro agad sagboka kanta no ogsuli to songo maroot. Di og-awoson to ungod kinow ogsumansuman ko ogmonuon ta to oyow oghimuon ta ka tibo no otow to maroyow, ko duma ta woy ko kono no duma ta.
mangkuan
Nò, nighimu to mgo hibatoon ni Hisus ka innangon din woy nigpanagana on sikandan to iglabung dan to Pagkoonan to Paligad.
wagoddoy
Woy agad hontow no kono ogtiang to krus din su ogkahallok to ogkamatoy, kono ogkoimu no hibatoon ku sikandin.”
hul-us
To ogmarani ogkahapun ka allow no ka sika sampulu woy darua no hibatoon ni Hisus, nandani kandin no kagi ran, “Buyag, pohipanawa nud on ka mgo otow dio to marani no mgo lunsud, mgo hilit oyow ogpamangho to ogpohibatan dan woy ogpakaboli to ogkoonon dan, su waro man baloy kai.”
Nahan dan no nakaruma on si Hisus buwa to mgo duma ran. Sikan ka nigparagas sikandan nighipanow to songo allow. Namangho dan si Hisus ko dio buwa mogduma to mgo sulod dan woy ko dio buwa mogduma to dangob no mgo duma ran.
susu
hapos
Ka kuralun ku, no-ulug to lamisaan no nabalingotngot su nagulak on su na-awò to nigliboran.
Ko sikanami, nigtuu koy on no nataga koy on to sikoykow ian ka matuwarong no pigsugu to Magboboot no nigligkat dio to kandin to oghondini to soi kalibutan.”
Ko ogdaralu ki, oglogoslogos dò ka og-onow. Sikan ka og-orol-orol su ogpogos ki to lawa ta.
Kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Nokoy ka nohimuan dan?” Nigtabak dan to, “Ka pighimuan dan ki Hisus no taga Nasarit no songo talagnangon ian to kagi to Magboboot. Duon kabogbogan to mgo kagi rin woy to mgo pighimu rin dio to tangkaan to Magboboot woy dio tangkaan to mgo otow.
to-u
Tatolu on no allow woy ran kitaa si Hisus, no duon dod dio to Dakol no Ampuanan no nigpataliwaro si Hisus nigpinnuu to mgo talag-anad to kagi to Magboboot no nigpamminog si Hisus to kagi ran woy songo duon inso din kandan tongod to pog-anad dan.
No ka Gimukud to Magboboot, songo ogpamalogot kanta to sikan su kagi rin to,
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Natalap kow to kono ogkouyag ka namatoy uromo su wa kow pad makasabut to impasulat to Magboboot ki Moisis woy waro kow makasabut to kabogbogan to Magboboot.
Di pogkamarusilom on, ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus, impatagu dan si Saulo to langkap no intuntun dan dio to tano dio to limang to sikan no matikang no alad to lunsud oyow ogpakapallaguy on.
Ko ogkatapusan to ogtubaran ka babuy no ogko-onan dan on.
Duon allow, ka tibo no mgo hibatoon ni Huan no Talagbautismu woy ka mgo hibatoon to mgo Parisiu, oglangkad to ogkoon. No, nighondio ki Hisus ka duma no mgo otow no nig-inso dan sikandin, “Manio kun to duon mgo allow no oglangkad to ogkoon ka mgo hibatoon ni Huan woy ka hibatoon to mgo Parisiu di ogkoon do atag ka koykow no hibatoon?”
Ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy ka mgo tahuronon, songo nigbagi-bagi ki Hisus no kagi ran,
ongkod
Warò liwak dan to ogpanumbaloy su dakol ka talabau ran.
Alap ka rò to sabun no mohomut.
uyun
Ian su ko nigtokod kid on to tu-tuu ian ka impakimatoy ni Hisus kanta, di ko ogparagason ta ro duon no ogtuuran to ogpakasalo, warad dangob no igkatubad ta no ogpakaawo to salo ta dio to Magboboot.
Kagi ni Pedro to, “Hondoi nu igpohimu kanami ka pagkoonan ta?”
Naan now buwa ko waro pulus ka sikan no impanangon to Magboboot to Tahan no Kasulatan no kagi rin to, “Ka Gimukud to Magboboot no kai to goinawa ta nigpougpo, ogpanalikud ko kono tad ogtiboon ka goinawa ta dio to Magboboot.”
dungdung
bulignus
Ogpakasaad ka sikan no kayu no su-an no ian a-alikoy.
maga-an
Dokad di, su mohon-ing ka ogmarayandayan to kandan no oghimuon no ogpokounug to soini no kalibutan, songo ogpakasayo ad to kanak no oghimuon.
Pogkaponga ni Sakarias to pogtuman din dio to Ampuanan, nig-uli on dio to ugpaan din.
“No ko ian now ro pasambayan ka otow no og-imanan now to ogpakaliwan kaniu ka igsokod to imbogoy now, waro pad igkasayo to Magboboot kaniu su agad mgo otow no waro mogtuu kandin, songo ogpasamboy rod ko songo og-imanan to unawa ka igliwan dan.”
Ka ngaran dan, si Simon no pigngaranan ni Hisus ki Pedro, woy si Andres no hari ni Pedro, si Santiago, si Huan, si Pilipi woy si Bartolomi.
bakus
Mgo sulod ku no indakoli ku to goinawa, ko duon maroot no oghimuon to songo otow kanta, kono ta igsuli ka songo maroot di igbalagad ta to Magboboot ko ogmonuon din to oglogpad, su duon ingkasulat dongan no kinagian to Magboboot to: “ ‘Kanak ka oglogpad. Kanak ka ogsuli.’ Sikan ka kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.”
Ka otow no maga-an ogkapolalan to talabau rin, mananoy ogkaponga ka baloy rin to oghimu.
Sikan ian, su ligkat to nasagboka ka goinawa now ki Kristu, nounawa to nigpatuli kow on no igmaganangon to nohimu kow on no mgo sakup to Magboboot. Dokad di, sikaniu no kono no Hudiu, ka nohimu kow on no sakup din, waro atag nigligkat to mgo otow no ogtuli poron to lawa now. Di nigligkat atag ki Kristu no nig-awo to mgo maroot no igkoibog to lawa now.
lalad
tigbal dò
Pogdinog to mgo otow to ian kinagian din ka kinagian dan no Hinibriu, warad ian nigkakagi sikandan no ogpamminog.
dalan-ug
Ko du-on ogkito-on ta no duma ta no warò ta pad tila-a, ma-agkap so goinawa ta kandin. Ma-awang ka goinawa ta. Ogpakasalig ki kandin.
Kagi rin kanak to, ‘Wow Kornilio, pigdinog to Magboboot ka pog–ampu nu. Woy pigsagman din ka igbogoy nu to mgo otow no ogkohirapan.’
Nò, to poghingaran din to soini to iam no sabut din, impohitaga to Magboboot to ogkatahan ka sikan no an-anayan no sabut. No agad nokoy no ogkatahan on, konad on og-awoson di ogkaawo do to konad on ogkalugoy.
Ka mgo ngalap to woig no poit maroyow ka sabow rin to duon iam no manggi-anak su oggatasan.
tobas
Ka tuud to ignangon ku, kono to oyow ogpakasoip kow no ogkabaybayaran no ogligkat to ogkaawo on ka igkabaybayari to sikan no mgo otow no nabuligan now. Di kuntoon su dakoldakol ka kaniu no pog-ugpo, litos ko ogkabuligan now ka mgo duma now no ogkoil-iluan on to og-awoson dan oyow ogpokog-unawa ro ka pog-ugpo now. No ko duon allow no sikaniu on man do ka duon og-awoson, sikandan man do ka ogsoip no ogbulig kaniu.
Ko pananglitan du-on oghimuon ta di ko du-on igkasasow ta, na-akoban ka oghimuon ta porom no an-anayan  no na-aloy ki diò to dangob no warò ta nato-ori.
Duon man do duma no ogkounawa sikandan to mgo boni no nakasawod to dugion su ogdinogon dan ka nangnangonon
Pa-alang ka su gamut so-ini no goramon nu.
Nò, to gutasan din, ogkoonon din poron ka koonon to babuy su waro agad hontow no ogbogoy kandin to agad nokoy no ogkakoon din.
takonlod
bulalù
Pogkaponga, no impasasindog on sikandan dio to tangkaan to mgo suguanon ni Hisus. No nig-ampuan dan sikandan. No to pog-ampu, intorong dan ka bolad dan dio to ulu.
Ko duon otow no ogduwaruwa no ogkoon to loin no ngalap su nahan din ko kono no litos to Magboboot, di ko paragason din dod to ogkoon, ogpakasalo sikandin su ogkalop-ang din ka nahan din no kono no litos no oghimuon din. Ko ogdoromdom ki to kono oglitos ka songo hinimuan, ogpakasalo ki ko oghimuon ta.
Kono si Huan ka soin no igbat-ow; kandin ka nigpohitaga to ogpakasundul pad ka soini no Talagbat-ow.
sunud
Tibò ayam du-on agasan di ka manuk, warò su kai to kiliran ka pa-a ran.
tapol
Nò, ka mgo hinimuan ni Hisus, naalap on to sikan no mgo otow no innangonnangon dan on dio to tibo no mgo marani no ugpaan.
Ka sikan, ogkounawa to innangon din to amoy rin no ian ka Magboboot. Kagi rin to, “Ignangon ku ka ngaran nu dio to mgo hari ku no nigtuu. No to pogkanta ku, ogsayoon ku sikoykow dio to tangkaan to mgo oglimudlimud no ogsayo koykow.”
Nigmarani on ka Pagkoonan to mgo Hudiu no ko ogpokouma, ogkoon sikandan to paan no waro amuti to igpatulin. Ka sikan no pagkoonan, nighingaranan dan to Pagkoonan to Paligad.
Uromo to allow to ogbobootan to Magboboot ka mgo otow, ogsolsolan kow to mgo taga Ninibi dongan su pogkarinog dan to innangon ni Hunas kandan, nigpan-ongkoran dan ka maroot no mgo batasan dan. No, kuntoon duon on kai to kaniu ka labow pad lagboy ki Hunas di waro now tuui ka innangon din kaniu.
Kò ka ogtalasak no oghipanow su mangayow
bubu-angon
gamak
Nahan now no sikaniu ka ogkatou no ogkitkit to mgo otow no nounawa to nabutud ka pogdoromdom dan. Woy nahan now rod to ogkounawa kow to ilawan no ogpakabat-ow to dalan dan to oghondio to Magboboot.
dagongdong
Nakarinog kow, mgo sulod, to batasan ku nokani no nig-unug a pad to tibo no tinuuan to mgo Hudiu. Nataga kow rod to nigbaybayaran ku ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus woy pinandakop kud on ka duma no waro ian ingkohoy-u ku kandan su oyow ogkoongkoran dan porom ka pogtuu ran ki Hisus.
“Do kow on ogparagas no ogtubad kanami su otow koy ro. Unawa koy kaniu no otow. No ian noy ro inhongkai su oyow ogkanangonan noy sikaniu to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus. Ian su oyow ogkoongkoran now on ka soini no mgo batasan now no waro pulus woy to oyow ogkahalin now ka goinawa now dio to tu–tuu ian no Magboboot no kono ogkamatoy. Sikandin ka nighimu to langit, ka tano, ka dagat woy ka tibo to agad nokoy no nakatagu.”
higbit
Ko marani on to pantad ka balutu ran ran, nig-umow si Hisus kandan. Nig-inso din ko duon ngalap dan no noutol dan.Nigtabakan dan to, “Waro; agad sagboka, waro.”
bakì
Nokoy naan ka ogligkatan to igmaroot to goinawa ta to mgo duma ta woy ko ogmo-og-ogotoy ki? Ian ligkatan ka mgo ogkoiniatan to lawa ta no ogpakabalabag to goinawa to Magboboot kanta.
Diò to kanami, woy ogkatahuron noy ko noimu on no pogbuyagon.
payag
Ko og-indos ka otow, diò ogbayò to balitang.
Nighimu ni Hisus ka tibo oyow ogkatuman ka innangon ni Isaias no talagnangon to Magboboot dongan no nigkagi to, “Nigbawian din ka tibo no mgo dalu noy woy tibo no mgo masakit noy.”
Ka ilis to woig no napò no ogtubu-an to tibogow, sikan ka bagunbun no tanò.
Ong-ongora nu to kalu-agi.
No lukos ka in-anak to boi. No ka sikan no bato, ian ka ogpakaalap to pandatuan to tibo no mgo koot-otowan kai to kalibutan uromo. No ko ogsugu on sikandin, waro agad hontow no ogpakaatu su mabogbog lagboy sikandin no ogkounawa to putow. Nò, nigsakolow ka bato no nig-alap dio to Magboboot woy dio to pinnuuanan din to pandatuan din no dio to langit.
bagani
tibbi
Du-on otow no nigto-on to hilut diò o salag to limukon. No na-alow din on on ka limukon no nohilut ka li-og no nabingbing on.
angkon
datul
Nigkagi ni Hisus kuwo kandan to, “Hagtong kow ka ogmugongmugong.
Nigtabak ka nabawian kandan. Kagi rin, “Koddi, wara a mataga ko makasasalo sikandin woy ko kono. Di nataga a atag to nabutud ad di kuntoon ogpakakita ad.”
no
Ogkaroromdom ku ka in-anad to amoy ku kanak tongod to talabau to oggabas to kayu no ighimu to baloy.
na-an
Si Kliopas ka ngaran to sagboka no ian ka nigtabak ki Hisus to, “Sikoykow ro buwa ka nig-ugpo dio to Hirusalim no waro ka mataga ko nokoy ka nohimuan dan dio to soin no mgo allow no nigligad?”
Woy nigbogoy ka Magboboot to katondanan koddi no Anak din to ogboot to mgo otow su koddi ka Kakoy to Koot-otawan.”
di nigbabansagon man do ka mgo otow to, “Ipalansang nu dio to krus. Ipalansang nu dio to krus.”
bagongbangan
Omunaan no nigsugu si Pilatu to oyow ogtumanon to mgo sundalu ka imbuyu to mgo igbuyag to mgo taga Hudia.
Nò, pogdinog to kapitan to mgo talagbantoy woy ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to sikan no Dakol no Ampuanan, nanasasow on. Nahan dan to manio buwa to nakalibuwas ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus.
Agad na-an ko ogkato-u to oghimu to pinayag ka asawa ni Aga, bali to konò.
Ko hondoi no baloy ka ogkalopowan now, kagii now ka mgo tagbanwa to, ‘Kaniu no og-ugpo kai to soin no baloy, ogkohoy-uan kow to Magboboot.’
to kono now ogkoonon ka igkatubad to mgo inotow-otow, woy ka langosa, woy ka ayam no pigloklok to poghimatoy. No ka dangob, kono kow oghilabot to kono no asawa now. Ko ogpaagad–agad kow to sikan do no ig–udling noy kaniu, maroyow. Waro duma. Sikan do ian ka ignangon noy kaniu.”
Di kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Kono kow ogkahallok su koddi do soini.”
diwata
aras
magaliug
Kono ogkaayun ko ka lukos no iam pad nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu ka oghimuon no igbuyag to mgo otow no nigtuu su songo kuwo buwa ko ogparakoldakol no ogkalogparan on sikandin to unawa to poglogpad to Magboboot ki Satanas.
dinug
tigbas
Pila ro no allow ka nigligad to sika pognangon ni Huan to mgo otow no nigpuun si Hisus dio to probinsia to Galilia no nokouma dio ki Huan oyow ogpabautismu sikandin ki Huan to woig to Hordan.
Woy nataga kow to soini no ig-anad noy, kono ogligkat to ubat, woy kono ogligkat to maroot no batasan. Woy songo kono kow oggawayan to sikan no ignangonnangon noy.
katumbal
kalan
Kagi man do ni Hisus, “Ko warad on ka sikan no igkabaybayari to mgo otow konad on oglayag ka allow woy ka bulan. Ogkokoulug ka mgo bituon ligkat dio to langit woy ka mgo planeta, konad ogbayo to tahan no bayaan dan dio to langit.
Ian su oyow kono kow ogpogulpogul to pogtuman now. Di og-awoson to og-iling kow nasi to sikan no mgo otow no ogpakapurut to sikan no insabut to Magboboot su ligkat to pogtuu ran woy ka pog-aguanta ran ko nokoy ka ogkabayaan dan no igkabaybayari.
Di waro pad mabogayi to Magboboot si Abraham to agad songo dangow no tano. Di nigsabut ka Magboboot kandin to, ‘Uromo, igbogoy ku koykow woy to mgo pinanganak nu ka soini no tano.’ Di waro pad anak ni Abraham no innangon on to Magboboot to sikan.
dogpak
Ko dio a to lunsud to Episu, nigbaybayaran a to mabulut no mgo otow no ian nounawa to mabulut no magintalunon no ogpamood to mgo otow. Nò, ko tu-tuu pa no waro pogkouyag to mgo nammatoy, nokoy pulus ko ogkohonduon a? Su ko kai ro to kalibutan ka pulus to pog-ugpo ta, balagad buwa ko og-iling ki to sikan no kinagian to mgo otow no ogkagi to, “Inum kinow woy hinalantoy ki su asolom, ogkamatoy ki ro duon.”
Ko ogbaligo-on ki, og-ilob ki to ngingi woy ko du-on kino-on no ogko-ilob. Ko og-ungod ki ogbaligo-on, ogko-i-ilob ki to nako-on ta.
Pogpitow ku no duon mgo otow no nigpinpinnuu dio to mgo pinnuuanan dan to pogboboot. Woy nigkita kud ka mgo gimukud to sikan no mgo otow no nanamporan to mgo liog dan su nigligkat to impamalogot dan ka in-anad ni Hisus woy su nignangonnangon sikandan to kinagian to Magboboot. No ka duma no ligkatan to pog-ogot kandan su waro dan simbaa ka sikan no magintalunan no nigligkat to dagat woy songo waro dan simbaa ka inotow-otow rin, woy su songo waro nigpapangotob to ngaran to sikan no magintalunan dio to mgo bukod dan woy ko dio to mgo bolad dan. No ogkouyag tibo sikandan woy ogbogayan sikandan to katondanan to ogbulig ki Hisu Kristu to pog-alap din to pandatuan din taman to sikan no songo malan no tuid.
Nigtabak sikandan no kagi ran to, “Duon ogkagi no sikoykow si Huan no Talagbautismu woy duon duma no ogkagi no sikoykow si Elias no talagnangon dongan to kagi to Magboboot. Woy duon duma pad no ogkagi no sikoykow si Hirimias no songo talagnangon dongan to kagi to Magboboot woy ko ka dangob no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot.”
Warò koy nigsalig kaniu
Tukow kow ungod su nasagboka kow on to Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow no si Hisus. No oghutuk a no ognangon kaniu, to oyow ogtukow kow.
batuk
Ian su og-awoson now to og-aguantoon ka igkabaybayari now oyow ogpokohimu kow to ogkoiniatan to Magboboot woy to oyow ogkapurut now ka sikan no innangon din kaniu.
“Unawa to narago ka sikan no boi no nigkita to salapi din, songo dakol man ka igkarago to mgo diwata no suguanon to Magboboot no dio to Langit ko duon agad sagboka no makasasalo no otow no og-ongkod to mgo salo din.”
miown
dua
igmaganangon
dugmò
bayò
Sumsumana nu ka soini no ingkaanad ku su ogbuligan kad to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta to oyow ogkasabutan nu ka tibo.
buyag
singkat
boluk
linlin
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Natalap kow man tongod to kagi now to kono ogkouyag ka mgo namatoy. Manio naan to natalap kow? Natalap kow su waro kow makasabut to impasulat to Magboboot kiMoisis woy waro kow mataga to kabogbogan to Magboboot.
Sudsuron ta ka mundù
Nigsakoy koy on to barku no nigligkat to lunsud to Adramitu. Ka sikan no barku, magaan on ogligkat no ogpanagpitsagpit dio to mgo ugpaan no dio to probinsia to Asia no duon to duunganan to mgo barku. Duon duma noy woy ki Pablo no si Aristarku. Sikandin nigligkat to Tisalunika duon to probinsia to Masidonia.
Su waro dio, nignangonan noy sikandin to, “Nakakita koy ki Hisus.” Di nigtabak si Tomas to “Ko sikoddi, woy ad ogtuu ko ogkitoon ku ka pali to lansang dut bolad din woy ogsapuon ku ka mgo pali din. Agad ko kono ku ogsamsamon ka pali to kiliran din, kona a man ogtuu to nootawan on.”
dalu
Dongan, ingkoholos pad ka soini no tuud to Magboboot, di impohitaga rin on kanak. No duon soini no malopot do no igkasulat ku kaniu tongod to sikan.
Nò, ayad-ayad kow to sikan no tu-tuu no dalan to oyow kono kow ogpakasuwoy no ogligkat to loinloin no mgo ig-anad. Ian su ka maroyow no igkohogot to pogtuu ta ka igkohoy-u to Magboboot, no kono no ka mgo Balaod ni Moisis tongod ko nokoy ka litos no ogkakoon ta no mgo ngalap. Ka mgo otow no nigtuman to sikan, waro mabuligi.
Og-aamon nu ka koykow.
Ogsinunduon to’g-iskit ka og-ispirma.
Nigtangkap ka pogtapid din to nakatkat no batu su nigkarasan din.
na-an pà
opuy
Woy duon ingkasulat ni Isaias dongan tongod to mgo otow no pinanganak ni Israil. Kagi rin to, “Agad mohon-ing ka mgo pinanganak ni Israil no ogkounawa kohon-ing to bayokbok dio to dagat no kono ogkasool, di manalingboka ro ka ogkapangabangan to logpad to Magboboot
ilas
diù
nati
Tibo no nakoon noy nabayaran noy on ian; waro koy nigsalig kaniu. Di nigpoomot koy nigtalabau to maallow woy ko marusilom oyow kono koy ogpakasasow to agad hontow kaniu to pog-ugpo noy.
Ko du-on ka mgo pinamula ta no mgo bulak, og-ayad-ayad ki ko ogdi-ok oyow konò ogkari-okan ka mgo bulak.
Olog nud ka so-ini no salapì to ogpoko-uma ka diò to Davao.
kalayati
Ogtibugon ta ka duma ta ko maroyow ka pogdumaruma ta kandin.
Si Sirobabil amoy ni Abiud. Si Abiud amoy ni Eliakim. Si Eliakim amoy ni Asor.
Pogligad to pila pad no allow no nigbabantaan on ka mgo Hudiu to oghimatayan dan si Saulo.
Ogkapoyad ka sopi-on ko og-anak ki.
To nig-abin dan ka mgo salo dan dio to Magboboot nigpamautismuan sikandan ni Huan dio to woig to Hordan.
Nighimu si Anggam to losung no do-isok di ma-agul ka bo-bò woy maralom.
Di waro koy mataga atag to manio ko ogpakakita kuntoon. Woy waro koy mataga ko hontow ka nigbawi to mata rin. Inso kow kandin su balubato on sikandin. Ogkataga to ogtabak ko noomonu ka lawa rin.”
Nò, ka lituk to kagi ku, insabuk noy ka nangnangonon to Magboboot to goinawa now no ogkounawa to igpamula to otow ka boni dio to tano. No su sikan ian, kono buwa no maroot ko ogbogayan koy nikaniu to igkouyag noy.
ungangon
Ogdaldal ka buan.
om-om
Ogsulatan ku sikaniu no nigtuu to ngaran to Anak to Magboboot su oyow ogkataga kow on ian to duon on to kaniu no goinawa ka kouyagan no waro katamanan.
“Nataga kow tibo no darua naan do no allow ligkat kuntoon, duon ka Pagkoonan to Paligad woy koddi no Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan ogdakopon a oyow igpalansang a ran dio to krus.”
bakaka
lutun
tanob
Ian su konad on og-awoson no ogkaalap ki to mgo maroot no koiniatan su ka ogpakamaroyow kanta dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, kono ogligkat to pogtuman ta poron to Balaod, di ogligkat atag to pogkohoy-u to Magboboot kanta.
Sikaniu, kono no usig now ka mgo otow kai to kalibutan. Di sikoddi atag, pig-usig a to mgo otow su ungod ku ognangoni sikandan to maroot ka oghimuon dan.”
Di woy nighipanow si Pablo, kagi rin kandan to, “Ko igbogoy to Magboboot, oglibong a ro.” No nigsakoy man do si Pablo to barku ligkat to Episu.
Ka otow, agad hontow, no ogpaboot to Gimukud to Magboboot, sikandan ka mgo anak to Magboboot.
Waro ogpakanangon to, ‘Pitow kow su soinid on ka Pogsugu din to kanami no ugpaan,’ woy ko, ‘Pitow kow su sooyo makasabuk ka Pogsugu din to songo ugpaan’ su ka Pogsugu to Magboboot, duon on kuntoon to kaniu di kono ogkitoon su dio do to goinawa now ian.”
Kono no goinawa ku, mgo sulod, no oghinallokon ku sikaniu to ignangonnangon ku ka soini no mgo sulat ku.
liu
Nigbunsud si Hisus to ogbatbat to mgo hibatoon din no kagi rin, “Sikoddi no Kakoy to mgo Kootawan kai to kalibutan, og-awoson no ogkabaybayaran a pad. Ogsamilian a to mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu, mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod ta. Ogpohimatayan a ran di ka igkatatolu no allow to pogkamatoy ku ogkootawan a ro.”
Ogsimbalan ka manggad ko malig-ot; konò ogka-olog
Ka batò no nakasalò, nig-ogotan to buyag. Kagi to songo otow, “Sikan ka pulus nu no batò ka konò ogpamminog.
Ian su nig-uyag to Magboboot si Hisus no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta ligkat to kamatayon din. No uromo, songo og-uyagon kinow on nikandin no ogligkat to kabogbogan din.
Di sikaniu,” kagi, “kono now oghonduona. Ko duon kaniu no ogkoiniatan to dakoldakol ka katondanan now dio to mgo duma now, awoson no ogbuligan now ka mgo duma now.
Sikantanow, mgo sulod, kono kid on no uripon to Balaod su pinalibuwas kid on ni Kristu. Nò su nakalibuwas kow, hogota now ka pogtuu now no kono kow ogpohutuk no ogpasakup to agad nokoy no ogpokouripon kaniu.
Di ka soin no mgo buyag to Hudiu, kono ogtuu to nabutud ka soin no lukos woy nabawian on taman to nigpaangoy ran ka amoy mgo inoy to sikan no lukos.
Ogkapolodpolod pad ka pogtakang din no ogdalapak to inoy rin.
Woy nig-inso si Hisus kandan to, “Ko nighingaranan ni Dabid ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan no Lagboy no Igbuyag din, manio to ignangon dan to pinanganak ni Dabid sikandin?”
Woy nigtabak si Hisus to, “Sikan on ian ka innangon nu, woy ognangonan ku sikaniu no koddi no Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan, ogkitoon a now uromo no ogpinpinnuu dio to kawanan to Magboboot. Songo ogkitoon a now no ogpokountud to gapun no oglibong a dini to soin no kalibutan.”
Sikaniu no mgo hibatoon ku, ogkounawa kow to asin no moomis ko ig-amut to ngalap, su pinabayo kaniu, ogmaroyow ka batasan to mgo otow. Di ko ogkaawo ka koomis to asin, konad on oglibong ka koomis din. Warad on pulus to asin ko warad on ka koomis din; litos on ian no igdogpak ta woy ogdiokdiokan to mgo otow.
Oglokò ki to songo olad no papil.
No oglogparan din sikandan su malomu no ogkatagaan dan ka Magboboot su duon impohitaga rin to oyow ogkatagaan dan man sikandin.
Nò, nigpoumow ni Huan ka darua no hibatoon din, no pogkouma ran, nigpohondio din on to ki Hisus oyow og-insaan dan sikandin to, “Sikoykow buwa ka Igbuyag no innangon ni Huan to ogpohondini on to Magboboot to kanami woy ko duon pad loin no otow no ogtagaran noy?”
Sikan ian, sikaniu no nigtuu, indakoli now si Hisus to goinawa. Di tongod to mgo otow no waro mogtuu, natuman on kandan ka ingkasulat dongan to, “Agad to indogpak to mgo talaghimu to baloy ka batu no igpohimu no pabunsuran to baloy, di ian on ka nig-awos to Magboboot no ogpabunsuran to baloy no oghimuon din.”
Nò, ka Magboboot dod ka ogpakamalogot to tu-tuu ian ka ignangon ku, to waro a makatood to oghondio to kaniu dio to Kurintu su noiniatan ku to waro igkabogoy ku kaniu to igmasakit to goinawa now.
lihans
ilis
bagnus
Ka sabow no ian in-amut ka gawgaw, ko konò ogguligawon, ogtimpuruk.
siksik
buì
gomow
bagdak
no nigdulug si Hisus to namatoy no niggongonan din ka nigpohibatan to namatoy. Nò, nigsagdok on ka mgo lukos no oglolong dut namatoy. Kagi ni Hisus dut namatoy to, “Utu, ogkagian ku sikoykow to onow kad on.”
Ka ogsondit, sikan ka og-ogot. Kagi to inoy to, "Maniò to warò now buligi ka amoy now?"
Nigbabansagon si Hisus to pog-anad dio to Dakol no Ampuanan dan. Kagi rin, “Nò, nakatokod kow kun koddi woy natagaan a now kun ko hondoi a nigpuun. Di kono sikoddi no pogboot to oghongkai. Ka nigsugu koddi no malogot sikandin no waro kow mogtokod kandin.
ilis
Paroromdoma nu ka mgo otow no nigtuu oyow ogpaagad-agad sikandan to mgo igbuyag dan, woy ka mgo otow no duon katondanan to og-alap kandan. Og-awoson dan to ogpaagad-agad kandan no ogkapanoy ka goinawa ran to oyow oghimuon dan ka agad nokoy no maroyow no igkasugu kandan.
Di ka otow no duon katouanan no ogligkat to Magboboot, waro maroot no ogpakaamut to batasan din. Maroyow ka pogdumaruma rin. Ogmoungangon sikandin woy kono ogparakoldakol. Di maal-alukuy woy mohoy-uon sikandin woy ungod oghimu to maroyow. Og-unawoon din doka pogsagman din to agad hondoi no otow no waro igkoholos no batasan din.
“Pogkalugoylugoy, si Hisus no kapunganan ni Dabid, ian on ka nighimu to Magboboot no Talagpangabang to salo to mgo pinanganak ni Israil, su sikan ian ka insabut din dongan to mgo kaap–apuan ta.
Duon sikandin kai to soin no kalibutan no pinabayo kandin nighimu to Magboboot ka soin no kalibutan di waro tokora to mgo otow to sikandin ian ka ogpakabat-ow.
tongò
Songo unawa sikandan koddi; warad labot dan to kalibutan.
bunsad
poyad
kayas
Pogkaponga, duon on dakol no samuk dio to langit. No si Migil woy ka mgo sakup din no olin diwata to Magboboot, nigpoog-ogotoy to sikan no ulod no oghingaranan to daragun woy to kandin no mgo diwata.
Songo duon mgo lobonganan no pilang no napuasan to sikan dod no allow woy mohon-ing no mgo otow no nigtuu to Magboboot no nouyag on.
Omunaan ko duon talinga now, pamminog kow,” kagi ni Hisus.
Woy sika otow no koddi do ka igkabuhi din woy ogtuu ka sikan no otow koddi, ogbogayan ku sikandin to kouyagan no waro katamanan. Og-inso a koykow, Igi, ko ogtuu ka to soini no ignangon ku?”
Di ko kono sikandin ogsugut, parumaa nu ka sagboka woy ko darua no mgo sulod nu to pogtuu oyow ogtitigus sikandan. Soini ka batasan oyow ogpaagad-agad kow to inkasulat to kinagian to Magboboot dongan.” Kagi, “Og-awos to ogtitigus ka songo darua ko tatolu to mgo igbayung woy mgo igtabak din.
bangalug
buyukut
Woy ligkat dod to pogkapirisu ku, mohon-ing ka sulod ta to pogtuu no, nigdakol ka pogsalig dan to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no konad on ogkahallok sikandan no ognangonnangon to kinagian to Magboboot.
Sikan no otow no ogkagi no ogligkat to kandin do no goinawa no ogboot ogkoiniatan din to ogkasayo ka kandin no ngaran. Di sikan no otow atag no ian din igkoiniat to ogkasayo ka sika nigsugu kandin, ogkatuuwan ka sikan no otow woy kono din og-ubatan ka mgo otow.”
Nanigbaltigbal ka tabò din.
Ko nalusuk ka tanò, ogka-anlas ka woig.
“Kuntoon, ogmamasakit so goinawa ku. Nokoy buwa ka ogbuyuon ku? Ogbuyu a buwa to, ‘Amo, kono ka ogbogoy to ogkoumaan a to soin no igkabaybayari ku.’ Di kona ad ogbuyu to sikan su ka igkoirapi ku ka tuud ku to oghondini to soin no kalibutan.
Ka nasalapì to bulu rin noubus to otow no nigsaligan din.
Ko ogdugmo-on ka babuy no ogkaboros, ogkabunag no ogka-awa-an ka ingkaboros.
Ogpasugkipon ka mata.
dolug
Woy agad hontow no ogsalin to ignangonnangon to soini no nasulatan, songo konad on ogbogayan to Magboboot sikandin to ogkoon to bogas to kayu no ogpakabogoy to sikan no kouyagan no waro katamanan. Woy songo og-awoon to Magboboot ka katondanan din to og-ugpo dio to sikan no dakol no lunsud to Magboboot no ingkanangon to soini no nasulatan.
Pogkouma ran dio, nigsolod on sikandan to baloy. To nigkita ran ka bato duma ki Maria no inoy rin, nigluhud sikandan oyow ogsimboon dan ka bato. Pogkaponga, pigpuwasan dan ka kalaglagan dan no nigpurut dan ka bulawan woy ka mahal lagboy no mohomut no ogkounawa to insinsu woy mira no insabuk dan dio to longod to bato.
Warò nigbogoy to ogpatongà ka sikan no bakotin.
Di dio to baloy, to duon mohon-ing no mgo magaliug, waro nigliwak woy si Hisus ka ogkoon. No kagi ni Hisus to sika sampulu woy darua, “Duruma kinow dio to wa otow oyow oghimoloy ki pad.”
Iam a pad niglabung kunto-on.
Nataga ki to maroyow ka sikan no Balaod no inggalat ni Moisis ko kono oghalinon ka tu-tuu no lituk din.
Nigtabak si Hisus no nig-inso din kandan, “Waro kow makabasa to nighimu ni Dabid no Igbuyag ta dongan duma to mgo sakup din no oggutasan sikandan no waro koonon dan?
Lagkos, nigsagpong dan ka mata rin to manggad no nigkagian dan to, “Tag-an ka ko hontow ka niglampos koykow.”
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin to, “Kono no kapapitu nu ro ogpasaylua ka ogpakasalo koykow ko kono no kapituan woy papitu.”
Nignapu-napù ka bubungan.
Nò, isulat nu ka igpapitow ku koykow no magaan on ogkatuman woy ka ogpakatuman on uromo.
tapil
kusisang
Itagub nu ka mo-irob
Songo allow duon mgo otow no nan-alap to mgo anak dan no molintok pad dio ki Hisus oyow ogpasamsam dan kandin to og-ampuan din sikandan. Di ko nigkita to mgo hibatoon din, nigsaparan dan ka mgo otow.
m-
Ka kunto-on no tipouri no mgo otow, du-on batasan to du-on on indosanan no kasilyas no du-on dò ogbatuk ka og-indos.
Di nigngisian dan si Hisus su natagaan dan to namatoy on ka bato.
Nò, nig-uwang ni Pedro no kagi rin, “Buyag, nig-ongkod koy on to tibo woy nigdumaruma koy koykow.”
Ian su ko nasagboka kid on ki Hisus, agad ko natuli ki woy ko waro ki natuli, ogpokog-un-unawa kinow ro dio to tangkaan to Magboboot su ian do duon pulus to Magboboot ko dakol ka goinawa ta to duma ta no ogligkat to pogtuu ta ki Hisu Kristu.
Tunud, woy ko kommag, salungag ka igbobol-og.
Sikan ian no niggunu to diwata to Magboboot ka mgo bogas to mgo pinamula no ubas dini to kalibutan. Woy insabuk din dio to dakol no lungag oyow ogkapongaan. No ka sikan, ian igpounawaan to sikan no dakol no poglogpad to Magboboot to mgo maroot no otow to soini kalibutan su dakol ka igkabolu din kandan.
Ka mgo ilaw ko oghirogò kid on, ogparongon ta
Ko nokoy ka ogko-ibogan din, ogbolion.
Ko oghikotan nu ka manuk no ogpakasabuk, ogpakalotu on ka manuk.
Tuilon ka dugi
Natumbidtumbid so bulbul dan to uran.
Maroyow ku lagboy no igbogoy ku kaniu ka tibo no dayagang ku woy ka tibo no kalaglagan ku no igbulig to pogtuu now. Ka sikan, igmalogot to dakol no goinawa ku kaniu. Di og-inso a ko ian now ro igbalos kanak ka pogmalintok to goinawa now?
nokani
Ka otow no nago-onan to kuddò din, nigbabansagon to ma-agbot no bansagon din to, "Maniò to ian a now ogkago-onan ka warò utang ku kaniu?"
“Pigkagi kud pinabayo to pananglitan kuntoon. Di ogkoumaan kow to allow no kona ad on ogkagi to pananglitan. Ogpan-utason kud to ogkagi kaniu bahin to Amoy ku.
Di ka soini no ignangon ku, kono to oyow ogpakatinawo a to igbogoy now kanak, di ogkoiniatan ku to oyow dakol ka igkasayo to Magboboot kaniu su ligkat to pogbulig now kanak.
Kagi pad ni Hisus, “Nò, mgo sulod no inat anak ku sikaniu, malopot naan do ka pog-ugpo ku kai to kaniu. Ogpamitawon a now. Di ka kagi ku kaniu, unawa ian to kagi ku to mgo igbuyag to Hudiu no nig-iling a to ‘Kono kow ogpakasundul dio to ogdatongan ku.’ ”
Oghun-a a ogpurut to kuddò nu no asolom ka pad on oghondiò to baloy ku no og-insò ko du-on igbayad ku.
Ungod ku ogsayoon ka Magboboot tongod kaniu su ka pogkohoy-u rin kaniu no nigligkat to nasagboka kow on ki Hisu Kristu.
tuyun
Agad nokoy no maroot no batasan salo dod, di duon salo no ogkapasaylu.
kawo-kawò
balungilit
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Malogot ka innangon now no ogkoumaan kow to unawa to igkabaybayari ku. Di kono no sikoddi ka duon katondanan to ogbogoy ko hontow ka ogpinnuu to kawanan ku woy ko gibang ku uromo. Ka Amoy ku no Magboboot ka ogbogoy to kandan no impanagana rin.”
Og-aanad ki ko nokoy no batasan ka maroyow to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu.
Agad pad sikaniu no mgo amoy no kai ro to tano no makasasalo kow no mgo otow di ogkatou kow rod to ogbogoy to mgo maroyow to mgo anak now. Ian pad naan ka Magboboot no ian Amoy ta no Magboboot no dio to langit, dakoldakol ka igbogoy rin. Ogbogoy to Gimukud din dio to agad hontow no ogbuyu kandin.” Ian ka kagi ni Hisus.
Nabaliung ka pogbantoy to buyag no ubal su ian nasì ogbantoy kandan ka anak dan no pilas.
dokad di to nohoy-uan a rod nasi oyow ogpakitoon ni Hisu Kristu ka mgo otow no waro nigtuu kandin to malayat ka goinawa rin kanak no duon dakol no salo. Ian su ogkoiniatan din to oyow songo ogtuu on sikandan woy to oyow songo ogkabogayan on to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
taruwoy
Ka tuud to Magboboot oyow, ko ogpokouma on ka allow no nig-indanan din, ogsagbokoon din naan do dio ki Kristu ka katondanan to tibo to agad nokoy no dio to Langit woy ka kai to kalibutan.
awò
sagow
No sikantanow no nig-abin din, kono no ka mgo Hudiu do, di songo duon mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no songo nig-abin din.
Dio to sika mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, ogsumpaliton a ran, og-iloban a ran, oglamposan a ran, woy oghimatayan a ran. Dokad di ka igkatatolu no allow ogkootawan ad do.”
Kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandin, “Koddi ka dalan woy koddi ka kamalogotan, woy koddi ka ogligkatan to kouyagan now. Waro agad hontow no ogpokohondio to Amoy ku no Magboboot ko kono ogbayo koddi.
Ka otow, agad hontow, no ogpamminog koddi woy ogtuman to kagi ku, ian ku ogpounawaan ka otow no nighimu to baloy no nig-ay-ayaran din to nigpos-ok su nigkali rin pad ka tano oyow dio din ig-untud to batu no nakalobong dio to tano. No, noumaan on ka sikan no baloy rin to woig no niglanog to dakol woy malogos no dakol ka luwak di waro moomonu ka baloy rin su makogal ka pog-unturanan din,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ka igkatatolu no poglibong dio to hibatoon din, nig-inso ni Hisus kandan to, “Oghihibat kow pad woy oghirogo? Litos on ian. Pitow kow! Koddi no Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan, noumaan ad on woy inpanabod ad dio to mgo makasasalo no mgo otow.
gustu
Ka agot-ot no tanò, konò ogtuga ka agoloy. Ogmagasò ka agoloy.
Ka sikan no Milkisidik, igbuyag dongan sikandin to ugpaan to Salim woy talagpanubad sikandin no suguanon to Lagboy no Mabogbog no Magboboot no ian matmatikang to agad hontow no ngaran. Dongan, nigtagbu sikandin woy ki Abraham to nan-uli no nigligkat to gira no naroog dan ka hop-at no igbuyag woy ka mgo sundalu ran. No to nokogtagbu on sikandan, nig-ampuan ni Milkisidik si Abraham oyow ogkohoy-uan sikandin to Magboboot.
Ka kono ogtuman to in-anad ku, sikan ian no mgo otow no waro goinawa ran koddi. No, ka in-anad ku kaniu no nigdinog now, kono ogligkat koddi ka sikan ko kono no dio ogpuun to Amoy ku no kandin ka nigpohondini koddi.”
sulug
tastas
Dokad di to nokohun-a on man maalap ka nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus dio to mgo mariu no mgo ugpaan no mohon-ing ka mgo otow no ogkalimudlimud to oyow ogpamminog kandin woy to oyow ogkabawian ni Hisus ka mgo masakit dan.
No sikandan no ian mgo pinanganak ni Israil, tibo ogkapangabangan to logpad poron to mgo salo dan, no ogkatuman on ka kinagian to Magboboot no ingkasulat dongan to: “Duon talagpangabang no ogligkat to Sion, no og-awoon din on ka batasan to mgo pinanganak ni Hakub no kono ogtahud to Magboboot.
dokot
malambog
sulung
Upulon ta ka babuy.
sipò
Sikan ian to ogpoomotan ta ka poghimu ta to maroyow no iglagkos to pogtuu ta. No lagkos to poghimu ta to maroyow, ogtimulan ta ka pogkasabuti ta to koiniatan to Magboboot. No lagkos to pogkasabuti to ogkoiniatan din, og-awoson to ogkaponod ta ka kono no litos no ogkoiniatan ta.
Ka duma no mgo boni, dio makasawod to batuon no tano no manipis do ka basak. Magaan nigtubu su mababow ro ka tano.
“Kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag to, ‘Soini ka oghimuon ku kandan no sabut, to uromo dio kud on igsabuk ka Balaod ku to taliwaro to goinawa ran woy dio ku igsulat to doromdom dan.’ ”
a-antualoy
halop
Ka dilo ta ka igsayo ta to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy ka Magboboot woy ian dod ka igpanungayow ta to duma ta no songo nohimu to Magboboot to oyow ogpokounug porom to kandin no goinawa.
Oghillop ka ulu to bo-u-u.
tabunan
Di duon kaniu no batasan. Ko soin no Pagkoonan to Paligad, ogpalibuwason ku ka sagboka no pinirisu. Ka goinawa now buwa to ogpalibuwason ku ka soin no Labow to Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu?”
songol
tompug
Di si Pablo, nig–alam din si Silas no nigduma rin. No nig–ampuan pad sikandan to mgo nigtuu oyow ogpabuligan to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. No nighipanow on si Pablo daruwa ki Silas.
Ogpamidpid ki to ilis to dalama.
Ka ig-alang noy, mgo kayu, banga, anohow, pangamoton, mgo bunal no ian ka mgo a-alangoy to mgo pinamula.
Nigpapulusan ni Simion to Magboboot si Maria alunggun ki Husi no nigkagian ni Simion ka inoy ni Hisus no si Maria to: “Ka soini no bato, ka Magboboot ka nig-alam kandin, oyow oglogpad sikandin to mgo otow no maroot so batasan woy ogpangabangan din ka mgo otow no ogtuu kandin. Ka soin no bato, sikan ka igtuus to Magboboot to ogbohog to mgo otow. Dokad di, mohon-ing ka mgo otow no oghubabo kandin.
Tunud, woy ko kommag, salungag ka igbobol-og
Kagi ni Hirodis to mgo suguanon din to, “Sikandin ian si Huan no Talagbautismu no nouyag sikandin ligkat to kamatayon din. Omunaan no dakol ka kabogbogan din no oghimu to mgo koin-inuan.”
ba-ul
Ko oggamit to kun, wà din pad imani ko tu-tu-u ka nigdinog din.
Ko nigkikita kow on ognangon ka pad to oghulid ka pad kandin su nighagsilan ka to sampot nu.
no
pangayungpù
toling
balagil
Ogkapapitu-an a rò no allow diò to dibabò.
Nò, nigmakagkagioy ka mgo Parisiu no kagi ran, “Pitow kow! Ogmonuon tad to naatangan kid. Pitow kow naan dio! Tibo no mgo koot-otawan, og-unug on kandin.”
Si Pablo woy si Birnabi, nigpagingalat pad dio to Antiokia. Woy mohon–ing pad ka mgo duma ran (no ogbulig) to og–anad woy ognangonnangon to kinagian to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.
dindinog-oy
Sikan ka tuud dan no nigbantayan dan si Hisus. Pigbayaran dan ka mgo talagpaniid no nigsugu dan dio to kandin no ogkounawa sikandan to mgo matuwarong no mgo otow no ogkoiniat to og-anad. Dokad di ka tuud dan to oyow oggawayan dan poron si Hisus to mgo tabak din kandan. Ko ogkatalap to igtabak din ogkaayun no ogdakopon sikandin no igbogoy ran sikandin dio to gobirnador no oyow ogbobootan woy ogkoogotan on sikandin to sikan no gobirnador dan.
Ka bangkalow, balagon no oglangkungon to ogmalibusonon, no igbangkalow to pogliid no ogsabo-on to ogpilak ka ogli-ag no mgo batò.
subung
Di kuntoon, kai a pad og-ugpo to lunsud to Episu taman to allow to Pagkoonan to Pintikustis.
bulutut
Sikan ian ka ungod ogpokohonduon kanak, su ko ogkoiniat a to oghimu to maroyow, ogkaroog a ro to mgo tahan no maroot no koiniatan to lawa ku.
ayow
pidpid
tagpì
bantang
Noinuinu lagboy sikandin to waro mogtuu to mgo otow kandin. Nò, nighondio si Hisus to dangob no mgo lunsud to og–anad to mgo otow.
po-it
Warò ogpoko-omonu kanta.
Ka soini no nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus, dio pad hunnoi nangnangoni to probinsia to Galilia ko napongaan ni Huan ka kandin no nangnangonon to mgo otow no nigbautismuan din dio to woig. Pogkaponga, nakalogoblogob on dio to agad hondoi to ugpaan to probinsia to Hudia.
Ka dungus, tabaku no mo-ilow.  Ka ngaran din, salingsing.
No duon inso ni Hisus to sikan mgo otow to, “Nokoy ka kanta no ig-anad bahin to Allow ta to Oghimoloy? Nokoy ka oghimuon ta, ka maroyow woy ko maroot? Ogpangabangan ta ka otow oyow ogkouyag woy ko oghimatayan ta ka otow?” Di waro nigtabak ka mgo otow.
panakinan
“Pamminog kow. Oghondio kinow to lunsud to Hirusalim. Ko rio kinow, koddi no ian ka Kakoy to Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan, ighatod a rio to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy to mgo talag-anad to Balaod ta. Sikandan og-uyun to ogpohimatayan a.
laging
Soini ka igsugu ku kaniu, dakola now ka goinawa now to mgo duma now no unawa ka goinawa ku kaniu.
Anoy no og-iman-iman to pila no bulan ka pogtagad dan to ogsanggì no warò nakasanggì.
Ogbabantang ka to isdà no ogligad no ko ogpakalongod on, ogbantangon on ka ogpilak.
kambu-oy
Ka abu-on ogko-iling to kolor no abug. Konò amana no maputì; ogsolug.
Nò, nansasindog on ka mgo otow woy niggongonan dan si Hisus woy nighatod dan on sikandin dio to libuwasan to lunsud dan. Ka lunsud dan, dio to ampow to songo malopot no bubungan. No og-ulugon dan porom si Hisus dio to diralom to dalama
Di ogbuyu a to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta to oyow ogkohoy-uan din atag ka lunggunan ni Unisipuru su malasi nigbulig to goinawa ku. Ian su waro atag masipod sikandin no ogpanumbaloy kai to kanak to napirisu ad.
Nò su duon ka maroot dio to kaniu, manio naan to ogparakoldakol kow? Manio to kono ogmasakit so goinawa now to sikan no maroot no batasan? Madmaroyow ko ogpaawoon now on sikandin oyow konad on ogpakaamut duon to kaniu.
kumbalò
pilò
solod
Ko duon otow no og-apul, sikan do ian ka batasan noy woy sikan dod ka mgo batasan to duma no mgo nigtuu no oglimudlimud no og-ampu dio to duma no mgo lunsud.
tomtom
lay-obon
Ian su duon ingkasulat dongan to talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot. Kagi rin to: “Agad hontow no ogsampit to ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, ogkapangabangan sikandin to iglogpad to Magboboot.”
bogas
Songo tikù dò ka balikù.
Warò masmasakup
panit
Mgo sulod, nokoy ka litos no oghimuon ta ko oglimudlimud ki to og-ampu? Ian litos ko duon songo otow no ogkanta to igsayo to Magboboot. Songo otow, duon ig-anad din. No ka dangob, duon ignangon din no impatokod to Magboboot kandin. Duon pad dangob no ogkagi to sikan no loin no kinagian no insabuk to Gimukud to Magboboot to kandin no goinawa. Woy duon otow no oglituk to sikan no loin no kinagian. Nò, to poghimu ta to tibo soini, og-awoson no ogkohogot ka pogtuu to mgo otow.
dolog
No, to rio nigtotomog ka mgo otow to hapuy to taliwaro to lama no naminpinnuu sikandan no songo nig-amut si Pedro kandan to songo nigpinnuu.
Di waro malugoy no nigsundul no nigpamitow si Simon woy ka mgo duma rin ko hondoi buwa nigdolog.
gulak
Nò, nigkagian ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din to pananglitan. Kagi rin, “Doromdoma now ka kayu no igira woy agad hondoi no kayu. Ko ogkitoon ta ka mgo tugbung to sika kayu woy inuburan ogkataga kid to magaan on ka tiggulabung.
Ko nato-uan din, songo ig-anad din to songo otow.
No duon karoyawi woy igkaratui no ogkaalap on dio to sikan no lunsud no ogligkat dio to agad hondoi no ugpaan kai to tano.
usa
Ogmataloytoy, matul-id woy ma-awang ka pogsabut ta.
Nò, dakol ka igkasipod ku no ognangon to waro koy atag niglangub to og-iling to mgo batasan dan no ogdoogdoog kaniu no nahan now no maroyow. Nò, su kono ogkasipod ka sikan no mgo otow to og-uwang to igmarayandayan dan, songo oglangub a no og-uwang to sikan dod no igsayo-sayo ku. Balagad ko waro pulus ku to ogkohonduon.
No to sikan no mgo otow no nigtuu on ki Hisus, mohon–ing ka nan–amut to sikan no nalimud no mgo nigtuu, no duon to tangkaan dan innangon dan ka mgo nohimu ran no kono no litos su og–ongkoran dan on.
pukapuk
Ig-unug ka batasan din.
abat
No ka sikan no ignangonnangon ku, waro pad dongan impohitaga to mgo otow. Di nigboot ka Magboboot to oyow igpohitaga rin on to mgo otow no ogtuu on kandin, lagkos to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. Ian to oyow ogkataga kid on ko songo monu karakol ka karoyawi no igkabogoy dio to agad hontow otawa. No soini ian ka nokoholos dongan no igpohitaga rin on, to og-ugpo si Kristu kai to taliwaro ta. No sikandin ka ogligkatan to sikan no im-imanan ta no karoyawi no igkabogoy kanta uromo.
Ko og-apot ka karabaw to dakol no woig, igbolbol dò to woig.
Pananglitan, ka lawa ta, mohon-ing ka igsumpul; kono no sagboka ro.
sul-ug
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, sikanta no nigtuu, kono ki man no kaap-apuan to sikan no uripon no boi su nohimu kinow on atag no kaap-apuan to sikan no boi no kono no uripon.
Mansalinown
sopì
Malogot ka soini no ignangon ku kaniu. Duon dini kuntoon no mgo otow no kono pad ogkamatoy taman to ogkitoon a ran no Kakoy to Koot-otawan ko ogpokouma ad on no duon katondanan ku to ogsugu to tibo no mgo otow kai to tano.”
Pogkaponga, nan-uli ka mgo diwata dio to Langit no kagi to mgo talagbantoy to ayam to, “Kuntoon, hipanow kinow dio to Bitlihim su ogpitow kinow on to nohimu dio no impohitaga to Magboboot kanta,” kagi.
susu to dalaga
Nò, ko ogkohimu no ogkabogayan ki to sikan no igkohoy-u to Magboboot no ogligkat pa to pogtuman ta porom to mgo Balaod din, konad poron ogligkat to innangon din do duon. Di ka ingkohoy-u to Magboboot ki Abraham, nigligkat do ian to insabut din.
Nò, nighutuk niglukbu woy nigsusulat nighutuk dio to tano.
Ogkapulusan pad sikandan no ogkabaybayaran to mgo otow tongod to poghimu ran to ogkoiniatan to Magboboot su nasakupan on sikandan to Pogsugu to Magboboot.
Nò, og-ay-ayaran noy lagboy to og-alap to igpabogoy now su oyow waro otow no ogpakabayung kanami ko ogkoomonu koy to pog-alap to sikan no dakol no igkohoy-u now.
“Koddi ka Maroyow no talagbantoy to karniru. Nataga a ko hontow ka koddi no karniru woy nataga ka karniru ku koddi.
Agad ka ulu now, kono no ipangalibot su agad sagboka no aslag kono kow ogpakamaputi woy ko ogpokomoitom.
batuk
No pogkita now to soini, ka mgo otow dio to probinsia to Hudia, og-awoson dan to ogsalsalia dio to mgo kabubunganan. Ka mgo otow no dio to solod to lunsud to Hirusalim, songo og-awoson dan to og-awo to lunsud, no ka mgo otow no dio to kamot, og-awoson dan to konad og-uli dio to lunsud dan
Wa din awosa to ognangonan sikandin to batasan to mgo otow su agad waro ognangon kandin, natagaan din ka duon to goinawa ran.
nakabatas
Pogdinog ni Elisabit to kagi ni Maria, nigwoilwoil ka bato dio to gotok din no nabogayan on si Elisabit to kabogbogan to Gimukud to Magboboot
Ka dangob pad. To si Elisiu on ka talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, mohon-ing ka mgo otow no ibungon kai to mgo ugpaanan to mgo Hudiu no ian mgo pinanganak ni Israil, di waro bawii to Magboboot ka agad sagboka kandan. Si Naaman do ka nabawian ni Elisiu to kogang din di taga Siria si Naaman; kono no Hudiu sikandin.”
Nokoy pad no nigtabak si Pilatu to, “Ko sikan ka ogkoiniatan now, nokoy naan ka ogkoiniatan now no oghimuon ku ki Hisus no sikandin ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan?” No, nigtabak sikandan to, “Iglansang sikandin dio to krus.”
Ko ogpangu-ig, oglo-uy koy to mgo turukanan.
Dongan, narago lagboy ka apu now no si Abraham to sikan no allow to sika poghondini ku. Nò, natagaan din soini no narago on.”
No kuntoon, ogpaagad–agad a to Gimukud to Magboboot no oghipanow ad on no oghondio to Hirusalim. Waro a mataga ko ogkoumonu ad dio.
Igpatangkap ta ka kinagian to Magbobo-ot.
Agad woy pad ogpokouma ka mohuri no allow,” kagi ni Hisus, “igparakop to duma no mgo lukos ka kakoy ran ko hari ran no nigtuu to ogpohimatayan. Duon dod mgo amoy no igparakop ka mgo anak dan no nigtuu oyow ogpohimatayan woy duon mgo bato no nabolu to nigtuu ka amoy mgo inoy no igparakop sikandan oyow ogpohimatayan.
“Sikan ian to nig–inso a ki Pablo ko ogkoiniat buwa sikandin no ogpalibongon ku sikandin dio to Hirusalim oyow dio ad og–insoinso kandin to tangkaan to mgo Hudiu su waro a mataga ko ogmonuon ku naan to sikan do no tinuuan ka igkasasow ran.
biò
Nò, ka tibo no mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisu Kristu, woy ka tibo no nighimu rin, woy ka tibo no mgo otow no ogpokootow kai to tano, ogpakasayo to Magboboot to waro katamanan. Malogot ian.
Ogbogayan kow to ogsolod su ko niggutasan ad, nigpakoon a now, woy ko namaraan a, nigpoinum a now. Agad to magaliug a rio to ugpaan now no waro a now tokora, impalopow a now rod dio to baloy now.
dawa
su ognangnangonan noy ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu to oyow ogtuu on woy to oyow ogkapangabangan on sikandan to mgo salo dan. Di ka mgo Hudiu, og-atangan dan poron ka ignangonnangon noy. Sikan ian to ogsokol on ka goinawa ran to mgo salo dan ogkounawa ro to tahan no batasan dan. Di ogkoumaan sikandan to igkabolu to Magboboot.
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Ko ka kabogbogan ni Satanas ka niggamit ku to pogdogil to mgo busow, no hondoi naan ogligkat ka kabogbogan no niggamit to mgo duma now to pogdogil to mgo busow? Pinabayo to nighimu to mgo hibatoon now, natalap kow to inbayung now koddi.
katod
Kagi to otow to, Tongod to utang to taga Kapugi dongan dò.
Ognangonan ku sikaniu no igpaalap ku pad ka mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot woy mgo otow no malayat so pogdoromdom dan woy ka mgo talag-anad. Oghimatayan now ka mgo duma, woy oglamposan now dio to Dakol no Ampuanan ka mgo duma, woy ogbaybayaran now sikandan to agad hondoi no ugpaan no ogpallaguyan dan.
no agad hontow no nakarinog to innangon kandan to mgo talagbantoy to karniru, nabolongbolong.
pikit
Di songo nataga ki to, ka Balaod, waro nohimu no igtambag to mgo otow no maroyow so batasan dan, di ian nohimu oyow ogkoudlingan ka mgo otow no kono ogpaagad-agad woy ka oglop-ang to Balaod, unawa to mgo otow no kono ogtuu to Magboboot, woy ka makasasalo woy ka kono ogtahud kandin woy ka oghimatoy to inoy woy ko amoy ran, woy ka ogpambunu
Woy songo impalibuwas din on si Barabas no ian napirisu su nighimu to samuk woy su nighimatoy to otow. Di imbogoy rin on si Hisus dio to mgo sundalu oyow ogtumanon dan ka koiniatan to mgo taga Hudia kandin.
Di koddi no ig-anad atag,” kagi ni Hisus, “ko og-ongkoran to lukos ka asawa rin no waro makasalo ka asawa rin kandin, ogpakapanlibug sikandin to sikan no boi ko oghutuk og-asawoon to dangob no lukos. Nò, ka lukos no og-asawa to sikan no nig-ongkoran no boi to asawa rin, songo ogpakapanlibug sikandin.”
banoy2
Kuntoon, sikanak no si Pablo, og-opusan ku ka soini no sulat ku to kanak lagboy no bolad. Ogpangumusta a kaniu. Kono a now kalingawi to napirisu a. Nò. Ogbuyu a to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow on to Magboboot.
Himua now soini oyow ogkounawa kow to mgo anak to Magboboot no duon to langit, su waro mog-alam kandin no ogpasilo to allow to mgo otow no maroyow ro ka batasan dan; songo ogpalayag din ka allow to mgo otow no maroot ka batasan dan. Woy ogbogoy to og-uran dio to mgo matuwarong woy to mgo makasasalo.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandin, kagi, “Awoson no ogtiboon ta ka goinawa ta dio to Magboboot. Woy songo lagkos no ogtiboon ta ka dayagang ta to ogtuman to igsugu din kanta puun to dakol so goinawa now kandin.
Ka sikan no magintalunan no nigkita nu, duon pogkootow rin dongan, di warad on kuntoon. Di konad no malugoy no ogpakalibuwas sikandin ligkat to sikan no bitu no kono ogkatogkad ka karalomi rin. Pogkaponga, ogkaalap sikandin dio to ugpaan no ogpakalogpad kandin to waro katamanan. Ka tibo no mgo otow no waro ikasulat ka ngaran dan dio to sikan no sulatanan to mgo ngaran to mgo otow no ogbogayan to kouyagan no waro katamanan ligkat to poghimu to kalibutan, ogkabolongbolong sikandan ko ogkita to sikan no magintalunan su duon dongan, naawo on di mangkuwan duon on man do.”
Nigtabak si Hisus to pananglitan. Nig-inso din, “Litos to goinawa now to kono ogkoon ka mgo pigtugunan to pagkoonan to kasal? Ka ku kow! Ko duon pad ka lukos no ogpangasawa kono ogkaayun no oglangkad ki ogkoon.
Ko koutukan ka mawangali, ogduaron ka.
Duon do nigsasindog ka boi to longod to paa ni Hisus no nakasinogow on sikandin. Nasubid on ka paa ni Hisus no nigtuluan to luwo to boi, no nigpunasan to boi ka paa rin to bulbul din. Napongaan din on to nigpunas, nigharokan din ka paa rin woy nigbus-ugan din on ka paa rin to sikan no mohomut no ogkounawa to lana no nig-alap din.
Duon otow dio to kaniu no ogparakoldakol su nahan dan no kono a ogpakapanumbaloy dio to kaniu.
kimoy
Sikan ian, og-awoson to, ka tag sagboka no boi, og-ungod ogpaagad-agad to asawa rin unawa to mgo otow no nigtuu on ki Kristu, songo ogpaagad-agad on kandin.
Nig-ugpo sikandan dio to Ehipto taman to namatoy si Hirodis. Nohimu soini oyow ogkatuman on ka innangon to Magboboot pinabayo to talagnangon din dongan no nigkagi to, “Nig-umow ku ka anak ku no nigpa-awo ku sikandin ligkat to Ehipto.”
Agad to sikan no oghimuon dan, ogpakatuman to sikan no tahan no Balaod, di nigkagi ka sulat to sikan ganna to, “Waro nu noiniati woy waro nu karagoi ka sikan no mgo ayam no ingkatubad woy ka mgo ayam no impatutung dan woy ko ka duma no inbogoy to mgo otow no og-awo poron to salo dan,” kagi.
bolobot
mangulod
balansagan
Nig-inso dan si Hisus, “Hondoi og-ugpo ka Amoy nu?” Nigtabak si Hisus to kagi rin, “Waro a now tokora woy songo waro now tokora ka Amoy ku su ko nigtokod kow porom koddi no ogkatagaan now ka Amoy ku ko hondoi mog-ugpo.”
Ipanu-ul nu kat batò.
Dio to Troas, nigsakoy koy to barku no nigparagas koy dio to pulu to Samotrasia. Ka igkarangob no allow, nighondio koy to lunsud to Niapolis.
Ko sikan ka oghimuon now, ogkannugunan now on ka goinawa woy ka mgo doromdom now oyow waro ogpakatagu no igkasasow now su ogkasagboka kow ki Hisu Kristu su ogkabogayan kow to Magboboot to maawang no goinawa now no kono ogkasabutan to duma no mgo otow.
Oggusi-on tad ka galung ta no pula no ogkito-on tad ka moon-ing no alibutod no og-aliboodbood on.
kidkiron
Ogtabak porom si Pablo, di nigkagi on si Galiu to mgo Hudiu to, “Ko duon pa salo no tu–tuu woy ko duon maroot lagboy no nohimu ni Pablo, ogpamminog a porom kaniu.
tinduk
Ka tibo dio to songo baloy woy ni Sakarias, nabolongbolong su noulian on sikandin, no ka sikan no nangnangonon tongod to tibo no nohimu ki Elisabit, woy ki Sakarias woy ki Huan no anak dan, nakalogob on dio to tibo no mgo hilit dio to mgo kabubunganan duon to Probinsia to Hudia.
Nakabayo on woy si Hisus dio to Hiriku no ko nigparagas sikandan duma to mohon-ing no mgo otow, duon ogpinpinnuu dio to ilis to dalan ka sagboka no nabutud no talagbuyu. Si Bartimius ka ngaran din no si Timius ka amoy rin.
Ko kono kow ogtuu ko ignangonan ku kaniu bahin kai to soin no kalibutan, ogmoomonu kow buwa oyow ogtuu kow ko ignangon ku kaniu bahin to ogpuun dio to langit no ugpaan to Magboboot?
Ko si Pedro pad, dio dod to marani to hapuy no oghinarang. Nig-inso ka duma no mgo otow kandin to, “Hibatoon ka rod buwa to sikan no lukos?” Nigligal si Pedro to, “Kona a no hibatoon din.”
Ligkat to pogko-ulug to anak ku, ungod ogpaka-alooy. Ogkagi to, “Og-al-al ka mgo lawa ku.”
kawoy
Kagi rin kandan to, “Ogkapulusan pad sikandan no nataga no kono sikandan ogpokohimu to maroyow ko waro bulig to Magboboot su nasakupan on sikandan to Pogsugu to Magboboot.
Ogbuyu ad to oyow ogkabogayan kow to maawang no goinawa woy to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow to Magboboot no ian Amoy ta. Woy songo ogbuyu a to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow rod ni Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
Ko nigkita ka mgo nalibulung no mgo otow ki Hisus, noinuinu su natokow to pogkouma rin no nig-agpas nandalapak kandin no nangomosta ran sikandin.
ligsom
taga
tanud
Ian to og–awoson to sikan ka oghonduonon now su ko kono nu pad ogkalituk to sikan no ignangonnangon nu, no ko duon otow no ogpakaamut kaniu to og-ampu di kono ogpakasabut, ogmonuon din to oghoohoo to igsayo nu to Magboboot?
Po-onan ka bogyas to mundù
tonggunggù
No ka sikan, ogkounawa to sikan no pananglitan no ingkasulat to kinagian to Magboboot dongan to: “Duon batu no igsabuk ku dio to lunsud no oghingaranan to Sion. No duon mgo otow no ogpakasipo to sikan no batu no ogpakarogpak on. Di ka mgo otow no ogsalig to sikan no batu, kono ogpokogsondit.”
Igpamariu koy nikoykow to maroot no pogdoromdom oyow kono koy ogpokohimu to maroot. Woy igpamariu koy nikoykow ki Satanas no igbuyag to mgo busow.’
Ogbokkal ka allow.
Ko tiggulabung on no malayat on ka pog-allow no ogkakaligtung on ka mgo bo-ugan no ogkoko-otian on to oggulabung.
“Nò,” kagi ni Hisus, “Soini ka ogkoumaan to otow no oglilimud to kandin no igkaratu no litos kandin do di dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, kono no datu sikandin.” kagi ni Hisus.
Ko duon pad ka tano nu, hontow pa so tagtuun ko kono no sikoykow ro? No ko naruwad nud on ka tano, hontow pa ian ka nigboboot ko ogmonuon nud on ka salapi ko kono no sikoykow rod. No manio naan to pigtuuran nu to goinawa nu to igholos nu ka baad to salapi? Kono no mgo otow ka pig–ubatan nu ko kono no ka Magboboot.” Kagi ni Pedro.
bagkos
kawad
Sikaniu no nalantoy on kuntoon, mohirap kaniu uromo su oggutasan kow. Ogkohoy-uan sikaniu no ogpakangisi kuntoon, su mohirap kaniu uromo su ogpakasinogow kow woy ogmandawit kow.
Kagi ni Pablo, “Kono no sikanak su Hudiu a atag no dio a mootow to dakol no lunsud to Tarsu duon to probinsia to Silisia. No ogbuyu a koykow ko ogpaagad–agad ka ko ogkagian ku porom ka mgo otow.”
Nò, to nokouma on woy si Hisus dio to lunsud to Hirusalim, mamatalo ka tibo no mgo otow dio woy nig-inso to, “Hontow naan sikandin?”
dagò
talantan
taligpuga
dokdok
Ko oghipanow ka batò no ogli-ag no ogkawayon ka limang no pa-a, songo ogkabosì on.
No-ugtu ka bulan
dolom
To nigsolod a,” kagi ni Hisus, “Waro a nu haroki unawa to batasan ta ko duon ogpanumbaloy di ka soini no boi, ligkat to pogsolod ku kai to baloy nu, waro nighagtong ka sikan no boi to ogharok to soin no paa ku.
Nabantug si Hisus dio to marani no mgo lunsud woy agad dio to tibo no ugpaan to Siria. Omunaan nig-alap to mgo otow dio to kandin ka tibo no mandaralu, agad nokoy no kalasi no ogkounawa to otow no nigsoloran to busow, ka ogbaboyon woy ko noumil no mgo otow. Nigbawian din ka tibo.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Uli kow on dio ki Huan. Nangoni now sikandin bahin to nakitaan now no nighimu ku woy bahin to narinog now. Nangoni now sikandin no pinabayo koddi ogpakakita on ka mgo nabbutud woy ogpokohipanow on ka mgo napulid woy nabawian on ka mgo ibungon, warad ka igkaligsomi ran woy ogpakarinog on ka mgo nabongol woy nabuhi on ka mgo nammatoy woy nakarinog ka mgo publi bahin to Maroyow no Nangnangonon. Napulusan ka sikan no otow no kono no limanglimang so goinawa rin to sikoddi ka impohondini to Magboboot.”
tokod
Nò, doromdoma now ro ka maroyow no goinawa now, no kono now on oghutukon ka salo now. Ogkagian ku sikaniu to soini su oyow ogkasipod kow su duon kun mgo otow dio to kaniu no waro nigtokod to tu-tuu no Magboboot.
bugtok
sodsod
ho-un
Ka gitara, hon-om ka tagpos din di ka kuglung, darua rò.
tangkò
Nigdani ki Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din no pigpukow ran sikandin. Nigkagi sikandan to, “Buligi koy, Buyag,” kagi, “magaan kid on ogkallonod.”
Ungod nigpamminog sikandan to mgo in–anad to mgo suguanon ni Hisus. Malasi nigparumdumooy sikandan woy niglimudlimud oyow ogkoon to harina no igparoromdom to pogkamatoy ni Hisus. Woy malasi nan–ampu sikandan.
Ka otow no ogdoot to Kakoy to Koot-otawan kai to tano, ogpasayluon to Magboboot. Di ka otow no ogsumpaliton din ka Gimukud to Magboboot, kono sikandin ogpasayluon taman to taman.”
No si Hirodis, songo nigpapamangho ki Pedro di waro ian makitoi. Sikan ian to ungod din insoinsoi ka mgo sundalu no nigbantoy ki Pedro, woy nigpohimatayan din on sikandan. Pogkaponga, nighipanow on si Hirodis ligkat to Hudia no nighondio to lunsud to Sisaria no dio pad nig–ugpo.
salapi-an
Ka boni no nakasawod to tano no batuon, ian ogkounawaan ka otow no magaan din ogdinog to nangnangonon to Magboboot no ogkarago woy oghoohoo ian to kagi rin, di ogkounawa to homoy no ogtubu dod di pogkalugoy, waro dalig din, su an-anayan ogtuu ka sikan no mgo otow di ko ogkoumaan on to igkabaybayari ran, magaan dan do ongkori ka pogtuu ran to Magboboot.
Aboy ki sogbayò dokad di sial.
Ligkat to pogtuu ni Abil dongan, madmaroyow ka kandin no intubad dio to Magboboot to sikan no intubad ni Kain. Woy su nigtuu si Abil kandin, impamalogot to Magboboot to maroyow si Abil dio to tangkaan din su narago to intubad din. Agad nalugoy on namatoy si Abil, di ligkat to pogtuu din, ogkaanad ki rod to maroyow.
Di duon dod duma, no kagi ran, “Nigbawian din ka mata to mgo nabutud. Kono din buwa ogkapogongan ka kamatayon ni Lasaru?”
Narago ka sikan no mgo igbuyag no innangon dan ki Hudas to ogbayaran dan sikandin.
Malomu ka pogtokod ta to mgo maroot no batasan no ogligkat to sikan no igkoibog to lawa ta: ko ogpanlibug ki, ko maligsom ka doromdom ta, woy ko aligon ki, woy ko duon agad nokoy no maroot no batasan ta no igkasipod ta poron.
tukias
banos
tilù
upow
Ogpa-awoy nu rò to ignangon to anak ku diò to warò ogdinog to ogpo-uli-on ku pad to takas to ogli-ag.
banggal
No dio pad si Pedro to Lida, nigdaralu on si Dorkas no dio to Hupi no namatoy on. Pogkaponga to nigpanarapu to mgo boi ka lawa ni Dorkas no namatoy, pig–alap dan on dio to songo sinabong dio to ampow to baloy no impohibat dan.
Sikan ka innangon din dongan pinabayo to kandin no impakagi to mgo talagnangon din dongan
binukul
Warad on pulus to sikan no asin. Kono ogkagamit to tano woy ko abunu to pinamula ta. Og-ongkoran do to mgo otow ka sikan no asin no warad nanam.” Kagi ni Hisus, “Ko duon talinga now, panalinga kow.”
pilokpilok
langgà
No ogkounawa si Hunas to impoindan to mgo otow no taga Ninibi dongan, woy sikoddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan kai to tano, sikoddi ian ka indanan to mgo otow no ogkootawan kuntoon.”
kolis
Sikan ian, sikanta no nigtuu ki Hisus, maroyow ko ignangon ta dio to duma ta ko duon mgo salo ta. Woy ogmaam-ampuoy ki to oyow ko duon daralu ta, ogpoulian on to Magboboot. Ian su dakol ka kabogbogan to sikan no ig-ampu to mgo otow no nohimu on.
laku
No kono do ogbuloy no ogdagsang on ka maagbot lagboy no dinug woy ogkagulak on ka igkasampulu no baad to sikan no dakol no lunsud. Ogkammatoy ka papitu no malan no mgo otow. No ka mgo otow no waro nammatoy, ogkakahallok on lagboy. No ogkasayo dan ka Magboboot no ian mabogbog lagboy no dio to langit.
Ogsalò ki to otow.
timbabakal
Ko ogsupmatan ta, oghondiò ki to baloy rin no diò ta ogtangkò kandin. Unawa ka supmat to ogtangka-an nu su ogkagion nu sikandin.
Ko duon igkabaybayari ta mgo sulod, maroyow ko og-ampu ki. No ko duon igkarago ta, maroyow ko ogkanta ki no igsayo ta dio to Magboboot.
Ko ogtibolus on woy ogsinikot on ka agoloy, no ko oglanos on ka tibolus to agoloy, ogpatokod to ogtasikan ka agoloy.
Ogsayoon a rin su ligkat to koddi ka duma no ignangon din kaniu.
kogos
Kono su nataga ki tahan to igkasipod ian to mgo lukos ko ogkoiling to mgo boi to malayat ka bulbul dan.
Si Huan no Talagbautismu, niglangkad to nigkoon woy waro nig-inum to inumanon, di nigdoot now sikandin to kagi now to, ‘Pigbusawan sikandin.’ ”
Ko nokouma on, nighondio ka soin no mgo otow ki Pilipi. Taga Bitsaida no songo lunsud to Galilia si Pilipi. Kagi to soin no mgo otow no kono no Hudiu kuwo ki Pilipi, “Sulod, og-alkuy koy porom ki Hisus.”
butud
Di ko kai pad si Hisus to tano, kono poron ogkohimu no talagpanubad sikandin su duon dod ka tahan no mgo talagpanubad no og-ayun to Balaod ni Moisis.
Nataga kow man poron to kono ogpakaamut to Pandatuan to Magboboot ka mgo otow no oghimu to agad nokoy no maroot. Kono kow ogpagawoy to goinawa now su kono ian ogpakaamut to Pandatuan to Magboboot ka mgo otow no oghimu to maroot, woy ka og-ampu to inotow-otow, woy ka oghimu to maroot to kono no asawa rin, woy ko duon otow no ogmool-olinoy ko lukos woy ko boi.
bulaw
Ungod ta ogsayoon woy ogtahuron ka Magboboot. Sagboka ro sikandin no Magboboot no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy waro katamanan to pogsugu din. Kono ogkakitaan sikandin woy songo kono ogkamatoy.
Di duma ta rod nokani si Hudas no songo nig–amut to katondanan ta no mgo suguanon ni Hisus. Ian su agad nokoy no imbogoy ni Hisus kanta no mgo hinimuan, songo ingkasalig din dod ki Hudas,” kagi ni Pedro.
Igtagpì to manduyawon.
Ogka-ayat ka lukos. To koddì no doromdom, konon litos.
towtow
tapayò
No ka dangob no igkasasow ku ko ogpokouma ad on dio to kaniu no ogkasiporan a to Magboboot no ogpakasinogow ad su mohon-ing dod ka mgo otow no nakasalo nokani no waro pad iniugi ka mgo maroot no batasan dan unawa to poghulid dan to kono no asawa ran woy ko kono dan ogponoron ka goinawa ran to agad nokoy no maroot no ogkadoromdom dan woy ka ogkoibogan dan.
Sikan ian to ogkabaybayaran a kuntoon. Di agad naan, waro a masipod to soini su natagaan kud on ian ka ogkasaligan ku, woy waro igduwaruwa ku to ogtantanuran din ka sikan no talabau no impatalipun din kanak taman to sikan no allow no oglibong si Hisus kai to soini no tano.
Nò, ka igkaruwa no diwata to Magboboot, imbus-ug din dio to dagat ka tagu to kandin no boung. Pogkaponga to pogbus-ug din, nigbaluy on no langosa ka dagat no ogkounawa to langosa to otow no nammatoy. No ka tibo no oggogoinawa dio to dagat, nammatoy on.
tagorala
Nigbogayan ad to Amoy ku to katondanan to ogsugu to mgo otow. Nò, songo ogbogayan ku sikaniu to unawa no katondanan.
Ko nalusuk ka tanò, ogka-anlas ka woig.
Nò man, nouli ka goinawa rin no nigpinpinnuu on woy nigkagi on. No nigduma ni Hisus ka lukos dio to inoy rin.
su dongan, kinagian to Magboboot ki Moisis to, “Kanak ka ogboot ko hontow ka ogkohoy-uan ku woy ko hondoi no otow ka ogdakolon ku to goinawa ku.”
Nataga ki to kono ogpamminog ka Magboboot to mgo makasasalo. Di ka otow no ogtahud to Magboboot woy ogtuman to igsugu din, ogpamminog ka Magboboot kandin.
Sikan pad ian nasabuti to mgo hibatoon din no kono naan ka malogot no igpatulin to paan ka igbohog ni Hisus kandan, dokad naan ka mgo maroot no mgo in-anad to mgo Parisiu woy Sadusiu.
papula
sugkip
bagoloy
Nokoy so napulusan din
Koy-u kaniu no Parisiu,” kagi ni Hisus, “su ian now ogkounawaan ka lobong no waro now makitoi no nariokan do duon to mgo otow su waro mataga to duon lobong.”
gasò
Di duon duma no mgo nigtuu no dio nigligkat to pulu to Sipri woy dio to lunsud to Sirini no nanhondio to lunsud to Antiokia. No piglagkos dan atag to ognangnangonan ka kono no Hudiu tongod to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. Di songo nignangonan dan dod ka mgo Hudiu to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon.
Diò to Maambago du-on ka nigpo-orok to agoloy. Di mangkuan, ko allow on to pogsanggì, warò nakasanggì ka nig-orok.
su duon soini no innangon to Tahan no Kasulatan to kinagian to Magboboot to, “Nigtuu on si Abraham to innangon to Magboboot, no sikan ian no pighingaranan on to Magboboot sikandin no maroyow.”
Kagi ni Hisus ki Sakiu, “Kuntoon no allow, koykow woy ka mgo duma nu kai to soin no baloy, nalipuasan kow on to mgo salo now su kuntoon no nig-unawa on ka pogtuu now to pogtuu to kaap-apuan ta no si Abraham.
Duon ka nigtuu ki Hisus woy duon ka waro mogtuu.
Titimbangon now ka mabogat.
bo-ot
di-ok
Agad nokoy ka dio to Amoy ku, salupungan noy ro sikan. Sikan ian naan ka kagi ku to ogpoitaga kaniu to Gimukud to Magboboot ka ignangon ku kandin.”
balagad
Natipun ka manuk ta ganna.
No duon kagi no nigpuun dio to langit no kagi rin ki Hisus “Sikoykow ka koddi no anak no igkarakoli to goinawa ku no dakol ka igkarago ku koykow.”
kalibutan
Soini ka inso dan ki Hisus oyow og-ol-ologan dan porom ko ogpaagad-agad si Hisus to Balaod dan woy ko kono. Ian oyow ko konon litos ka tabak din, sikan ka igbayung dan kandin. Nò, si Hisus, nig-unduk woy nigsulat dio to tano to tinuru din.
Di to igkatatolu no allow to pogkamatoy ku, ogkootawan a rod.” Nasasow lagboy ka mgo hibatoon din to soini no innangon ni Hisus kandan.
Pogkaponga,” kagi ni Istiban, “insabut to Magboboot ki Abraham to og–awoson to ipatuli din ka kandin no lawa woy ka lawa to mgo anak din no lukos woy nigsugu to igpatuli on uromo ka mgo pinanganak din. No ko duon on anak ni Abraham, no si Isaak, no ko wawalu ka allow ligkat to poglosut din, pigtuli din on. Pogkalugoy, songo nigtuli ni Isaak ka kandin no anak no si Hakub, woy songo pigtuli ni Hakub ka sampulu woy daruwa no anak din. No ian ka mgo kapunganan ta,” kagi ni Istiban.
Sikan no mgo otow no og-iniugan a ran no kono dan ogtumanon ka kagi ku, duon ogboot kandan woy oglogpad uromo. Ka kagi ku no innangon ku kaniu, sikan ka ogboboot kandan to mohuri no allow.
Sikan ian to mohon–ing ka nigdinog to kinagian to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy nigmanokal lagboy to sikan no ugpaan.
bulili-in
Di dakoldakol pad ka pogkohoy-u to Magboboot kanta oyow ogpokounug ki to kandin no goinawa. Sikan ian to duon impasulat din dongan to, “Og-atuan to Magboboot ka otow no ogparakoldakol di ogkohoy-uan din ka ogpoobos.”
luwan
Ko ogsubla ka ogbosik no al-al, ogpakangangang ki to masakit.
sayò
Di duon loin no sugu no ogpakalipuwas kanta to oyow kono kid on poron ogkaayat to mgo salo. No ian din igsokod kanta uromo ko ogbobootan kinow rin. Sikan ian to og-awoson ta to og-ayad-ayad ki to tibo no oghimuon ta woy ka ogkagion ta.
Pogpitow ku man do no duon nigkita ku no ogkoiling to dagat no lamita no nasolugan on to hapuy. Woy nigkita kud ka mgo otow no nakaroog to sikan no magintalunan no nigligkat to dagat woy waro nigsimba to inotow-otow rin woy waro nigpapangotob to numiru no ig-indan to ngaran din. No ka sikan no mgo otow, dio mansasasindog to ilis to sikan no dagat no ogkoiling to lamita. Tag sagboka kandan, nig-alap to ogparagingon no oghingaranan to alpa no imbogoy to Magboboot kandan.
Wà koy tugoi
lidlid
Sikan do ian no nabawian on ka dalu to sikan no lukos. Nò, nig-onow, nigsasindog, nighonat din ka ikam din woy nighipanow on. Allow ran to Oghimoloy ian ko nabawian on.
to
pisuk
“Koy-uan ka sikan no otow no ogtambaboon din ka agad hondoi no bato no ogtuu koddi oyow og-ongkoran din ka pogtuu rin koddi. Madmaroyow ko ogkohikotan ka liog to sikan no otow to batu to galingan woy igdogpak sikandin dio to dagat.”
limorang
tul-id
Nakatood ka soini no tuud din to og-abin kaniu su ligkat to sikan no Maroyow no Nangnangonon no nigtuuan now. No ian to oyow ogkabogayan kow to karoyawon no ogligkat to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu.
Ka manuk no ogdaralu, ogto-ob ka sulang din.
hanggu
buyag
Nig-umow ni Hisus ka songo bato no impasasindog din dio to tangkaan to mgo hibatoon din.
Warò koy na-anad to sikan no du-on ngalap. Na-anad koy to warò ngangalapoy noy.
lo-ug
tulungtulung
Nig-ulaluyan nu ganna ka asukal.
dalaga
Pogkita ni Hisus to mgo nalibulung no mgo otow, nohoy-uan din lagboy sikandan su mohon-ing ka mgo igmasakit to goinawa dan di waro ogbulig kandan. Ogkounawa sikandan to mgo ayam no oghingaranan to karniru no waro talagbantoy kandan.
Woy ko ogkoiniatan nu to koykow ka datu og-awos to koykow ka oripon to tibo no mgo otow.
kamomo-u
Ka otow no nigsusugba, nigkuò to saput no impuas to so-ob to kandiru su mo-init.
tugkò
Ko duon mgo pagkoonan, ian maroyow ran to ogpinnuu to longod to igbuyag to pagkoonan. Woy ko dio to Dakol no Ampuanan, ogkoiniatan dan ka mgo pinnuuanan no ogkoindanan to mgo mabantug no mgo otow.
No ko duon otow no og-ongkod to tibo no oghimuon din no maroot, ian din ogkounawaan ka sikan no kalaglagan no igtagama to magaliug su og-indanan ni Hisu Kristu ka sikan no otow no litos to oghimu to agad nokoy no maroyow.
balagon
Ka pog-ampu ku, to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow tibo to Magboboot. Amin.
Di kuntoon, ogbuyuon ku sikaniu to kono kow ogkahallok su waro agad sagboka kanta no ogkamatoy. Ka barku ro ka ogkaraat.
langguyud
pangotob
Pogkaponga,” kagi ni Gamaliel, “Duon otow no taga Galilia no si Hudas no nakaayat to pila buwa no mgo otow. Di mangkuwan songo pighimatayan dod no songo nokogsuwoysuwoy ka mgo sakup din.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Pitow kow kuntoon to soin no mgo baloy no dakol kai to Dakol no Ampuanan. Ogkagulak uromo ka tibo no soini no mgo baloy no waro ogkagalat agad sagboka no batu duon to nasabukan din; ogkatobal ka tibo.”
To noumaan on to mohuri no allow to sikan no Pagkoonan dan no soini ka labow no allow, nò, nigsasindog si Hisus dio no nigbabansagon. Kagi rin, “Wow mgo sulod, mgo anggam. Sikan no otow no ogkoibog to og-inum, oghondini koddi oyow og-inum.”
Kagi ni Pablo to, “Ka pogbautismu ni Huan to mgo otow, ian su oyow igpapitow ran to ogsondit woy og–ongkoran dan on ka mgo batasan dan no maroot. No innangon ni Huan kandan to og–awoson dan to ogtuuan dan ka Otow no ogsundul kandin no si Hisus.”
Ogbuyu koy kaniu to oyow ipohitaga now ka dakol no goinawa now to tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu no ogmakukumustooy kow no ogligkat to kanami.
Sikan ka kagi ni Hisus ko og-aanad dio to solod to Dakol no Ampuanan dan no dio to marani to taguanan to salapi no igbogoy to mgo otow. Mohon-ing so otow ka ogbayo dio di waro makarakop kandin su wa pad mokouma ka litos no allow rin.
No, inlansang dan on si Hisus dio to ampow to krus no pig-onow ran ka krus. Dio to tano, nighantak ka mgo sundalu ko hontow ka ogpakaabin to mgo kinabo ni Hisus.
Nò, mohon-ing no ogpasakup porom ki Hisus, konad on ogduma kandin; konad ogpasakup su ka sika no innangon din.
Moin-insooy ka mgo Hudiu no ogsamilian dan. Kagi ran, “Manio buwa ka sikan no kagi rin to kono ki ogpakasundul dio to kandin no ogdatongan? Nokoy buwa ka kalitukan? Oghimatayan din buwa ka lawa rin!”
No dio to Putioli, nakalambag koy to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus, no nighinggat koy dio to baloy ran, no papitu no allow ka pogkougpo noy dio. Pogkaponga, no nighipanow koy ro no oghondio to lunsud to Ruma.
buntatok
luang
tinawò
Di, ka igbuyag to mgo sundalu, dakoldakol ka pogsalig din to kapitan woy ka tagtuun to barku, no waro din amana masagman to imbohog ni Pablo.
To nokouma on sikandan, kagi ni Hisus, “Ampu kow to Magboboot to oyow ogbuligan kow oyow kono kow ogkaroog ko og-ol-ologan kow ni Satanas.”
Mgo sulod, ogpaagad-agaran ta ka mgo igbuyag ta kuntoon woy pamminogan ta sikandan. Ian su ogkasaligan sikandan to Magboboot to ogpabantayan ka pogtuu ta taman to ogpokouma on ka gimukud ta dio to kandin. Ian su to mohuri on no allow, ogpakanangon sikandan to Magboboot ko nokoy ka ingkasalig din kandan tongod kanta. Nò, ko ogpaagad-agad ki, ogkarago sikandan to pog-alap dan to pogpangatondanan dan. Di ko kono ki ogpaagad-agad, ogmasakit ka goinawa ran no kono ki ogkabuligan to sikan.
Duon dod si Hudas Iskarioti no sikandin ian ka ogtabod pad ki Hisus.
Nò, kagi rin to mgo hibatoon din, “Dakol ka oggaanion porom di ka mgo oggaani, manalingboka ro.
Tugulon ka tol-ob to tuma su bukonuton.
ispat
tulin
Ka mgo anak to hari nu kai no indakoli to goinawa to Magboboot, ogpangumusta koykow.
tangkod
Ka otow no dakol ka ogko-on, ogkagi ka songo otow to, “Amana so-ini no otow ian dò to ungud ogdangas.”
Ko du-on og-oggung, kandin dò ka ogduyug ka ogpanaluroy.
No to tibo no oghimuon ta, kono ki ogmugongmugong to poghimu ta woy kono ki og-apul.
Ko du-on otow no ogdakopon ta, ogkagi ki to, “Konò kad og-atu su no-upul kad on no nalingutan kad on.”
limukon
Ian su, ka pogkamatoy ta, nigligkat to salo to sagboka no otow no si Adan. No ogkounawa rod, su ka pogkouyag ta ligkat to kamatayon ta, songo ogligkat to sagboka no otow no si Hisus.
no pigtimtiman din ka sika woig no nabawi on no inumanon. Waro mataga ka sika igbuyag to suguonon to mangasawa ko hondoi mogligkat ka inumanon. Nataga atag ka mgo suguanon no nigsakug. Nò, pig-umawan to sika igbuyag ka sika ogpangasawa
dalonò
pulpul
Sikan ian to og-awoson to og-iniugan tad on ka tibo no maroot no batasan ta woy ka tibo no lagut no duon to goinawa ta. Woy songo og-awoson to igpariralom tad ka goinawa ta to Magboboot su oyow ogpakapaagad-agad ki to kinagian din no ingkasabuk din duon to goinawa ta. Ian su ka kinagian din ka ogpakapangabang kanta to sikan no iglogpad din.
wa-it
Ka ignangon ku kaniu, ogkoiniatan ku ko tibo kinow, ogpabulbuligoy to poghogot to pogtuu ta.
bukus
kuru-kurù
Konò ka ogdagkot kanak su oghalinan ka to sakit ku.
Nigparagas si Pablo to, “Nò, Buyag. Ian ku inhondio to Hirusalim su mohon–ing on ka tuid no nanligad ka waro a makapanumbaloy, no duon igbogoy ku to mgo duma noy no mgo Hudiu no duon og–awoson dan, woy su duon dod igbogoy ku to Magboboot dio to ampuanan noy.
To naponga nigkagi to soini, impapitow rin kandan ka pali to mgo bolad din woy kiliran din. To nigkita ran, nataga on to si Hisus ian woy narago on lagboy to nigkita ran sikandin.
Nigkagi rin soini oyow ogkatuman ka kandin no innangon to Magboboot. Kagi rin, “Amoy, waro ka agad sagboka no otow no nigsalin to sikan no imbogoy nud koddi.”
Nokani to si Hirodis pad ka labow no igbuyag dio to Probinsia to Hudia, duon sagboka no talagpanubad to Magboboot, no ian ngaran din si Sakarias. Sakup si Sakarias to songo puntuk no mgo talagpanubad to Magboboot no ian puntuk ni Abias. Ka asawa ni Sakarias, si Elisabit, no ian kapunganan ni Elisabit, si Aaron.
Wa nigtuu ka tibo no mgo otow ki Hisus. Di nigtuu ka mohon-ing no mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu. Di wa dan nangoni ka mgo duma ran su ogkahallok to mgo Parisiu ko kono dan ogpasoloron to og-ampu dut anaranan dan.
tambul
No, nokouma ka sagboka no publi no balu no in-ulug dan ka darua no malison no putow no salapi no malintok do ka pulus.
samboy
Bali naan impohondio din ka anak din no lukos no kagi rin, ‘Ogtahuron buwa sikandin to mgo talagbantoy to ubas.’
Ogko-unawa ki Ann Joy no moirap ka sakit din. Nigtawaran noy on ka konad on ogkabuì.
ogtagood to ogdoogon ku ka mgo usig nu su oyow ogpakaluhud to tangkaan nu.’”
sabol
Ko duon masakit ta, woy ko ogdaralu ki, ogpaangoy ki to mgo pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu. Ogpapoiran ta sikandin to lana woy ogpaampuan ta to ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
su sagboka ro ian ka Magboboot. No sikan ian, ogmaroyawon din on ka mgo Hudiu ko ogtuu on ki Hisus, no songo ogmaroyawon din ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu ko songo ogtuu on kandin.
Ka otow no ogkogò ka ogkagì, su ogkasipod to ognangon to duma rin ko du-on og-awos din.
okang
Tatolu no takang to batò
Ian a nu rò sukuti.
Sangkod no pala-os
Ka katondanan din, songo dio ogligkat to sikan no katondanan to sikan no nokohun-a no magintalunan. No nigpogos din ka tibo no koot-otawan kai to tano to oyow ogsimboon dan ka nokohun-a no magintalunan no duon dakol no pali din no ogpakimatoy poron kandin di noulian on.
Ka karpa no ngalap, woy ogpanganak ko ogsilò ka bulan.
Sikan ian, mgo sulod ku no nigtuu, hogota now ka pogtuu now oyow ogpakasasindog kow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.
Ka tibo no mgo duma ku kai, ogpanangon koykow to igparoromdom dan koykow. Woy songo igpanangon noy rod ka igparoromdom noy to duma no mgo otow no nigtuu on ki Hisus no duon goinawa ran kanami su ligkat to pogtuu ta. Ogbuyu a to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow tibo to Magboboot.
Pinogharok ka gotok dan no darua. Ka dangob no iglituk, pinogdagkot.
Ogkapulusan pad sikandan no ogpokohusoy to mgo duma ran no nokog-ogot su oghingaranan sikandan to Magboboot no mgo anak din.
lituk
Soksokon si Bandiling
pawò
Songo og-awos to ognangonan ka tibo no otawa bunsud kai to lunsud to Hirusalim to ogpasayluon sikandan to mgo salo dan to Magboboot ko ogsonditan dan woy og-ongkoran dan ka mgo salo dan.”
Ian su ogtagtagooran ta ro ka soini no kalibutan. Di ian tanow atag og-im-imanan ka sikan no ogkougpaan ta no lunsud no dio to langit.
No ko sikan ian ka oghimuon ta, ka dakol no goinawa to Magboboot to mgo otow, ogkatibulus on kai to kanta no goinawa oyow songo igdakoli ta ka mgo duma ta. No ian su oyow ko ogpokouma on ka allow no ogbobootan to Magboboot ka tibo no mgo otow kai to kalibutan, kono kid ogkasipod to ogtangko kandin. Ian su ko kai ki pad to ampow to soini no tano, og-unug ki to batasan ni Hisus.
Woy natagaan kud on ian to, ka maroyow no nigbunsuran din duon to goinawa now, ungod din oghimuon taman to ogkapongaan din on uromo ko oglibong on si Hisu Kristu kai to kalibutan.
Konò a ogbogoy kaniu su kò now dò no logob.
Di ka soini no mgo bolad ku ka nigtalabau to oyow duon ka igboli ku to mgo og–awoson ku woy ka og–awoson to mgo duma ku to pog–ugpo noy.”
lawang
Kono nu kalingawi si Hisu Kristu. Kapunganan ni Dabid sikandin no pogkalugoy, nigpakimatoy on, di pogkaponga, nouyag do. No ian ku ikanangonnangon to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon ku.
Kagi pa ni Hisus, “Nò, kono kow ogtuu ko duon otow no ognangon to ‘Pitawa now, kai ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan’ woy ko duon ignangon to ‘Pitawa now, dutun sikandin,’ ko kow ogtuu kandin.
balun
pamanghò
tumpis
Ka igkarangob on ka no-olog on to nakaboli.
bakuli
limma
No ka pogpitow ku to sikan no mgo talangas, no ogkoiling sikandan to mgo kuddo no nigpanagana to dakol no samuk. Woy duon mgo tangkulu no bulawan to mgo ulu ran. No ka mgo langlanguwan dan, ogkoiling to langlanguwan to mgo otow.
Pogdinog to mgo pogbuyagon to sikan no imbatbat ni Pablo, nigsayo dan on ka Magboboot. No kagi ran ki Pablo to, “Sulod, tow ka to pila buwad on no malan ka mgo Hudiu no nigtuu on ki Hisus. No tibo kandan, og–ayad–ayad to ogpaagad–agad to Balaod ni Moisis.
itik
Ligkat to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, og-iman-iman koy tongod kaniu to ogpaagad-agad kow kuntoon woy to ogparagas kow no ogpaagad-agad to innangon noy kaniu.
bagbag
Pogpitow ku, no duon dangob no diwata to Magboboot no dio nigsasindog to allow. No to maagbot no kagi, nig-umawan din ka tibo no mgo manukmanuk no oglayanglayang dio to aw-awangan. Kagi rin kandan to, “Hondini kow woy limudlimud kow on oyow ogmatugtugonoy kow on to sikan no dakol no pagkoonan to Magboboot.
Nò, ligkat to sikan no igkabaybayari now, mohon-ing no mgo otow no og-ongkod to pogtuu ran to Magboboot woy ogtabod woy og-usigon dan ka duma ran.
Mgo agpot ki rò kai to tanò.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Koy-u kaniu porom no mgo talag-anad to Balaod. Piggongon now ka susi no ian ogpakapulas to lokob to baloy oyow og-anad kow porom bahin to Magboboot. Di sikaniu, kono kow ogpakasolod no ogsaparan now ka ogkoiniat to ogsolod,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ko og-aguantoon nu rod ka so-i lawa ku no nigkogang on, awa-a nu su oyow ogmaroyow on.
Nanoy ka pà su ogpanapatus a pad.
Ko ogtimtim ki no ogkananam ta to mo-omis ka sabow to babuy, ogmananam on.
No ka soini no nangnangonon tongod to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus, nigtangkap on to tibo no ugpaan to Pisidia.
Ian su duon ignangon din kaniu woy to tibo no mgo duma nu kai to baloy nu oyow ogkapangabangan kow to mgo salo now.’ ”
Kagi to anak din to, ‘Amo, dakol ka salo ku dio to Magboboot woy dakol ka salo ku koykow. Konad no litos no oghingaranan a nu to anak a nu.’
Duon mohon-ing no mgo otow no nighun-a ki Hisus woy duon dod mohuri no ogpakasundul no ogbabansagon to, “Ogsayoon tanow ka pinanganak ni Igbuyag Dabid. Ogkapulusan ta ka soini no lukos no nighondii to ngaran to Magboboot. Songo ogkasayo ka Magboboot.”
kotul
Pakalaaglaag ka nigkuò to sika kuò ku.
pula
“Nò,” kagi ni Hisus to sika kapituan woy darua no mgo sakup din to, “Hipanow kow on di doyroyow kow su sikaniu, ian now ogkounawaan ka maamuk no ayam no oghingaranan to karniru, di dio to oghondian now, duon mgo otow no mabulut no ian ogkounawaan ka magintalunan no asu no ogpammuod to ayam.
Og-awoson to igpariralom ta ka goinawa ta to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, no pogkaponga, ogbatunon kid on nikandin.
Konò ogkapakoy no oghondini ka ariplanu su nasirà.
Woy mohon-ing ka mgo otow no ogtahud ki Hisus no nanbolatan ka ogbayaan din to kandan no malayat no mgo kinabo. Ka dangob no mgo otow nanampod dan to mgo molintok no sugpang no duon dod dohun no nangatkat dan to bayaan din.
ilainon
Dio nu ipapitow su kono igholos to mgo otow ka oghimuon dan su ian dan ogkoiniatan oyow ogmabantug ka ngaran dan. Ko oghimuon nu ka mgo igkoinuinu no papitawa nu ka tibo no mgo otow; kono no dii ro no mgo otow.”
lorut
Kagi, “To og-uli ka tagtuun no oghimatayan din on ka sikan no mgo otow no talag-uyamu to pinamula rin no ogpasoipan din to loin no mgo otow.” Pogdinog to mgo otow to kagi ni Hisus, kagi ran to, “Otowoy! Mamug ka! Maroyow ko kono ogkatuman on ka impananglitan nu.”
Ko moon-ing ka lawo-lawò to talubagì, ogpanguiton ta to walis ka baloy to talubagì oyow ogka-awò. Ko ogkuiton nu ogkaragdag ka mgo lagut.
Kanak no si Pablo, napirisu ad su nigtuu a ki Hisu Kristu. No sikanak woy si Timoteo no sulod ta to pogtuu, ogsulat koy koykow, Pilimun, no talagbulig kanami no indakoli noy to goinawa.
olin
Ka soini no dakol no igkohoy-u now, ian ka ogpakamalogot to pogtuu now. No ligkat to sikan, ogkasayo dan ka Magboboot su ogpaagad-agaran now ka soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus woy su dakol ka igbogoy now to sikan no mgo nigtuu woy dio to duma no mgo otow.
taan
Ka otow ogkuò to bulu no magatarok no sikan ka ogbotakon to ogpori.
linulinu
lugì
Nò, sikanta no nohogot to pogtuu ta, og-awoson no og-aguantoon ta ka pogtuu to duma ta no kono amana no hogot no kono ta oghimuon ka igkarago to kanta ro no goinawa.
Di pogpitow to mgo Hudiu to mohon–ing ka mgo otow no nan–amut no ogpamminog ki Pablo daruwa ki Birnabi, lagboy on ian no noima. Sikan ian to nig–atuan dan ka innangonnangon ni Pablo woy nandoot dan.
Ko ogsilab ki no ma-agbot ka kalamag, ogdakol ka kutu to hapuy no oglayap no ogtugpa diò to songo bubunganon no songo ogkasilaban on.
Agad ka mgo busow, og-alomud su oghinallokon ki.
Kò pad ka-ayad-ayad katuas ka gimukud; pamalii.
Ka otow diò to bubungan, ogngaranan to mabonbon ka malogos no woig.
gawoy
olad
kamoy
sulud
silsil
magakinomù no uran
Di agad hontow no oghimu to maroot, songo maroot ka igsuli to Magboboot. Ian su waro og-alamon din no otow su ko duon ogpakasalo, ogkalogparan din.
isuv
tulan
Nigtabak si Pilipi no kagi rin, “Pila buwa no libu, Buyag, ka litos to ogboli to paan no litos to soin no mohon-ing no mgo otow woy kono do no litos to ogpakoon to soin no mgo otow!”
Nigdani si Hisus to balutu no nig-untud dio to longod dan no nighagtong on ka kalamag. Dakol lagboy ka igkoinuinu to mgo hibatoon din
Sikanami, daruwa koy no gatus woy kapituan woy hon–om ka nigsakoy to barku.
dalu
Ko ogbuyu kow, agad nokoy to koddi no ngaran, oghimuon ku soini.”
tobas
Ka biò, ogngaranan to boi no datù tongod to batasan din su ogkato-u to og-anad woy to ogpanhusoy.
Oghimuon tanow ka insugu to sikan no nigsugu koddi to duon dod allow ta. Ogpokouma on ka marusilom no warad ogpokohimu, agad hontow.
Dio nignangonnangon si Hisus to mgo anaranan to mgo og-ampu no dio to Probinsia to Galilia.
Kagi rin kuwo kandan, “Dio now sisigay to kawanan to balutu now su duon ngalap dio.” Nò, nigtoon dan on ka sigay ran no mohon-ing ka nigsagad no ngalap to sigay ran no kono dan ogkagoon to oghusud.
Di nig-inso si Pilatu to, “Manio naan? Nokoy ka salo din?” Nasi on man nigbabansagon to, “Ipalansang nu dio to ampow to krus.”
Di nigkagi ka diwata kandan to, “Ko kow ogkahallok, su ognangonan kow to maroyow no nangnangonon litos to igkarago to tibo no mgo koot-otawan,
Nò, ligkat to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu woy ka Magboboot no ian Amoy tanow, ogbuyu koy to oyow ogpanokalnokal to goinawa now to ogtuu woy to oyow ogbuligan kow ran oyow ogmaroyow tibo ka oghimuon now woy ka ogkagion now. Dakol ka goinawa rin kanta no ligkat to pogkohoy-u rin kanta, duon on igkarago ta no waro katamanan woy duon on ka maroyow no ogkoim-imanan tanow.
Woy ka sagboka no otow, ka lagboy no usig din ian ka mgo otow no og-ugpo to kandin no baloy.
Ko du-on ogko-iniatan no ogpangasawa, og-abalangon. Og-alukuyon ungod ka amoy taman to ogho-o on.
damuluan
Sikanami, ogngisian koy to mgo otow su og-anad koy tongod ki Kristu. Di sikaniu, nahan now no maroyow atag so ulu now su ligkat to pogtuu now ki Kristu. Sikanami, nahan now buwa to malintok ka pogtuu noy kandin, di dakol atag ka kaniu no pogtuu. Sikaniu, ogkabantugan kow to mgo otow di sikanami atag, oglomotan koy.
Ko oglibuwas ka tibo, oghun-a ka sikan so talagbantoy no ogluyud ka mgo karniru su ogtokoron dan ka kandin no lagong.
Ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, waro dan matagoi ka mgo Balaod no impasulat to Magboboot ki Moisis dongan, di ko oghimu sikandan to maroot, ogkalogparan sikandan to kamatayon no waro katamanan, di kono no ka Balaod ni Moisis ka igsokod to Magboboot to mgo batasan dan. Di ka mgo Hudiu atag, nataga to Balaod to Magboboot no ingkasulat ni Moisis, no ko oghimu sikandan to maroot, ka sikan no Balaod ni Moisis ka igsokod to mgo batasan dan no songo ogkabootan sikandan uromo to Magboboot.
pangabang
ooy
butung
“Nò,” kagi ni Istiban, “Makogal on ian ka ulu now. Ogpabobongol kow ko nokoy ka igsugu to Magboboot kaniu. Ogkounawa kow to mgo otow no waro mataga to Magboboot su nasi kow og–atu to Gimukud din. Ka batasan to mgo apu now dongan, sikan dod ian ka og–unawaan now kuntoon.
Nignangnangonan dan ka talagbantoy to pirisuan woy ka tibo no otow duon to baloy rin to kinagian to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.
gilang
panalandop
Ko nigtokoran a nu rod no duma nu, songo nigtokod nu rod si Unisimu. Ka tabak to so-ini, “Maniò to konò ki ogtokod to duma ta rod.”
Ian igmananoy to pog-ulì su warad igkapiliti to poglibong to pog-ulì.
Patotoran ka bolad ku.
Nataga kow on to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon no impaalap to Magboboot dio to mgo pinanganak ni Israil. Woy nataga kow to si Hisu Kristu, ian ka Lagboy no Igbuyag to tibo no mgo otow kai to kalibutan. Sikandin ka ogpakabogoy to maawang no goinawa ta to Magboboot.
Ka otow no uripon, saboka no sugu-onon no ogbaybayaran sikandin to igbuyag din to dakol no talabau rin.
“No ligkat to sikan taman to si Samuel on ka talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, duon mgo talaghusoy no impohimu to Magboboot no tagooran do no mgo igbuyag dan.
Ian su ka sikan no lukos no waro pad nigtuu, ogpamaranion to asawa rin sikandin to Magboboot ko nigtuu on ka boi. Woy ka boi no waro pad nigtuu, songo ogpamaranion to asawa rin no nigtuu on to Magboboot. Di ko ogkagalat ka anak dan to waro nigtuu, ogkoiling do ka mgo anak dan to waro nigtuu; mariu to Magboboot. Di ko waro ongkori ka asawa, songo ogkamarani on ka anak dan to Magboboot.
silut
Woy duon ka og-ampu to mgo inotow-otow woy oggamut. Ogpous-usigoy sikandan woy ogpoog-ogotoy. Ogsilag, magaan ogkabolu, oglogodlogod woy ogmabaadbaad to mgo duma ran.
tupak
Ka igna-asna-as ni Utù to alukuy rin to oyow konò ogkataga ka inoy rin woy amoy to ogduma sikandin to amigu rin no oghondiò to Manila.
Ka otow no nabogayan to katouanan to ogpohogot to pogtuu to duma rin, songo og-awoson dod to sikan ka oghimuon din. Ko nabogayan ki to katouanan to ogpangabang to songo otow no duon og-awoson, ogbogayan ta to waro logodlogod. No ka otow no nabogayan to katondanan to pog-alap to duma no mgo otow, og-awoson din to og-ay-ayaran din to pog-alap din kandan. No ko nabogayan ki to katouanan to pogkohoy-u to mgo otow no nabaybayaran, og-awoson to ogkohoy-uan ta ian sikandan no ogligkat to pogkarago ta.
Sikan ian ka nigsulatan ku sikaniu. Kono ogligkat to waro kow pad mataga to tu-tuu no nangnangonon. Di ogligkat atag to nataga kow on ian to sikan no tu-tuu no nangnangonon woy su songo nataga kow to waro ubat no ogligkat to (sikan no) tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon.
arikampol
og-ayaton
ogkounawa to waro katagaan din di ogparakoldakol do duon woy duon maroot no ogkoiniatan din to ogpaap-apuloy ro duon tongod to mgo kinagian. No duon ian ogligkat ka ogkoimaima, mgo pogpoog-ogotoy mgo ogparo-dootoy, mgo pogpansob dan to duma ran no kono ogligkat to tu-tuu ian,
langgi-on
su kono ogkohimu ko kono no matuwarong ka Magboboot. Pananglitan, ko kono pa no matuwarong ka Magboboot, kono poron ogkohimu ko ogbobootan din uromo ka tibo no otow to soini no kalibutan.
Sikan ian no nigtuu on si Sirgio Paulo ki Hisus su nigkita rin on ka ingkabayo to sikan no bailan woy su nabolongbolong si Sirgio Paulo to sikan no ingkaanad woy ni Pablo tongod to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.
No ayad-ayad ka su naan pà ko oghirogò ka no inogò no ogko-ulug ka hari nu.
Ka ignangon ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “Kono kow ogkasasow amana ko hondoi kow ogpamangho to ogkoonon now woy ko woig no og-inumon now. Kono kow ogkasasow
Og-unugon ta si Hisus su sikandin doka ogligkatan to pogtuu ta. Woy sikandin dod ka ogpakatimultimul to pogtuu ta taman to taman. Nigpoponod si Hisus to igkabaybayari rin dio to krus woy nigbalagad din ka igkasipod din to kamatayon din su nigdoromdom din ka sikan no dakol no igkarago din no impanagana kandin dio to langit. No, kuntoon, diad on to langit sikandin no ogpinpinnuu to kawanan to Magboboot.
pingot
Du-on otow no ogdaralu no ogko-ulingol to mgo batò ko ogmanlili-ag.
payag
No ligkat to sikan, ogpokoiman-iman ki to pogkouyag ta no waro katamanan dio to Magboboot. Sikandin, kono og-uubat, no ko waro pad ka soini no kalibutan, tahan din inangon to ogkabogayan kinow on to soini kouyagan no waro katamanan.
Kuntoon,’ kagi rin, ‘og-uli ad dio to amoy ku no ogkagian ku sikandin to “Amo, dakol ka salo ku dio to Magboboot woy dakol ka salo ku koykow.
Agad ko duon mgo kogos woy ko dangob no manggad no igparagkot dan to lawa ni Pablo woy songo igparagkot dan pad to lawa to mgo otow no duon masakit, no ogkaawo on ka mgo masakit dan woy ka mgo busow duon to lawa ran.
Bantoybantoy kow su ogpandakopon kow no ighatod kow dio to tangkaan to talagboot. Ogpanbarasan kow dio to mgo anaranan to mgo og-ampu. Ogpohondion kow rod to tangkaan to mgo kinalabawan dan woy ka labow no mgo Igbuyag su ogtuu kow koddi. Di ko rio kow, ogpakanangon kow kandan to Maroyow no Nangnangonon.
Nataga ki to pighimu to Magboboot si Abraham no maroyow dio to tangkaan din. Di ka sikan, waro mogligkat to pogtuman ni Abraham to mgo igkoiniat to Magboboot. Ian su ko nakatood pa si Abraham no ogtuman to tibo, duon poron litos no igsayo din to kandin no lawa. Di ko dio sikandin to tangkaan to Magboboot, kono no litos ko ogsayoon din ka lawa rin
Ka otow no ogmaro-ot so goinawa rin su iam nali-us ka anak din no namatoy, pogkapawò, nigbanhow on ka goinawa rin no nigma-awang on ka doromdom din.
dayu
Agad hondoi no kayu, ogkatagaan tad su ogkitoon ta ka bogas din. Pananglitan, ka bogas no ogkakoon ta no oghingaranan no igira, kono ta man ogkapupu dio to banag su kono man no lawa rin. Ka bogas no ubas no songo ogkakoon, songo kono tad ogkapupu dio to sapinit.
langkown
Sumsumana now ka kagi ku kaniu to, ‘Kono no labow ka katondanan to suguanon to ogsugu kandin.’ Ko ogkabaybayaran ad to mgo otow no waro nigtuu, songo ogkabaybayaran kow nikandan. Ko ogtumanon dan ka koddi no innangon kandan, songo ogtumanon dan ka kaniu no ignangon.
No pogkaponga to sikan, nigkagi man do to, “Soini ad on, Magboboot, to oyow ogtuman a to ogkoiniatan nu.” No ligkat to sikan no innangon din, nataga kid on to warad on pulus dio to Magboboot ka sikan no mgo tahan no igtubad dan woy songo nataga kid to, ka kamatayon ni Hisu Kristu ka ingkaliwan to sikan no mgo ayam no igkatubad dan.
kimut
walas
Nò, nigmugongmugong ka mgo Hudiu su ka sikan no kagi rin to kandin ka sikan no igkouyag no ogligkat dio to langit.
tugkoling
Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu to kono pad man ogkoubus ka tibo no otow no nouyag pad kuntoon woy ogkohimu ka innangon ku kaniu.
Kaniu no ogtuu koddi og-usigon kow to tibon otow tongod koddi. Di atag, ka sikan mgo otow no ogpakaaguanta taman to ogkatuman ka igkabaybayari, ogkabogayan to Magboboot ka sikan no mgo otow to iam no kouyagan dio to kandin.”
Nigparagas nighipanow woy si Hisus no nigkita rin ka dangob no darua no patalahari duon dod to balutu dan no ogbalbalawan dan ka mgo sigay ran. Si Santiago woy si Huan ka ngaran dan no ian mgo anak ni Sibidiu.
Pogkohinug on ka soini, oggaanion to sikan no otow su tiggaani on man.”
uyun
Di ka duma no mgo otow no nigtuu no dio to duma mgo ugpaan ka nigbulig kanak to nig-awos ku to pog-ugpo. Ka sikan, noiling to naagawan ku sikandan to oyow ogkabuligan ku sikaniu.
tibug
Nigsobu on ka woig.
Duon mgo Hudiu no nigtuu on ki Hisus no nig–amut on ki Pablo daruwa ki Silas. Woy mohon–ing ka mgo Girigu no nigtahud to Magboboot di songo nigtuu on lagkos to mohon–ing ka mabantug no mgo boi.
Di kagi ni Hisus, “Kono now sapari su sikan no otow no oghimuon din ka igkoinuinu no oghingaranan din ka ngaran ku kono magaan ogpakakagi to maroot bahin koddi
Di ko ogbobootan ki to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta to duon salo ta, ogbogayan ki pad to igsapad to oyow uromo kono ki ogpakalagkos to logpad to mgo otow no waro nigtuu kai to soini no kalibutan.
woig
Ko warò no-utol, warò napamu-od din
Dokad di, nataga si Hisus to kagi dut goinawa ran no kagi ni Hisus dut noumil so bolad to, “Dii kad. Kai ka ro ogsasindog.” No nigsasindog on ka otow no noumil so bolad no nigdulug on ki Hisus.
nanam
Ian su, ka lukos ka talagboot to asawa rin no boi unawa to si Kristu ka talagboot to mgo otow no nigtuu on kandin no ian lawa rin. No si Kristu rod ka nigpangabang kandan.
Pogkita ni Sakarias to sikan no diwata no suguanon to Magboboot, naaras woy nahallok sikandin.
No ka mgo sundalu, songo nigsusumpalit no nigdulug ki Hisus no intaruwoy ran kandin ka suka no igpoinum dan poron kandin no
Nò, ligkat to sikan no allow, ungod ogsumansuman si Hudas to iggawoy rin ki Hisus oyow ogkarakop sikandin.
Ka otow no oglogsad to tanò, ko ogpakarongan to ogkutol ka limukon, konò ogto-od to ogpamano-ug to tanò ka otow.
baghot
Ko nigdurulug, lagboy no nigmarani.
Nò, kono man ogkaayun ko ogkagian nu pad ka duma nu to, ‘Sulod, dii kad su ogkuiton ku pad ka sika no molintok no nakabulog to mata nu to duon naan batang dut koykow no mata?’
sogod2
sopò
atol
Ka mgo buyag, ogpanlo-uy to matosan no latì, no ogbabalo-an pad ko maroyow ka tanò no ogkamotan.
kabugkul
bugan
Ka asu no ogpammu-ud to babuy, ogsungsungan din ka komos to babuy no og-ikulon din.
Ka ogkasamò no mgo bokog, igsunggud to mgo asu.
No ka kapitan no ian igbuyag to mgo sundalu, to nigkita rin ka tibo no nohimu ki Hisus, nakasayo on to Magboboot no kagi rin to, “Ogtuu a ian to waro ian salo to soi otow.”
Nò, nigsakupu rin ka mgo bato tag sagboka no pigsamsam din ka bolad din kandan woy pigbuyu ni Hisus ka Magboboot no Amoy to ogbogoy kandan to karayawan.
tapi-an
To poghondio ni Husi oyow igpalista to ngaran dan, pigduma rin si Maria no og-asawoon din. No si Maria, ogkaboros.
batò
Konò ogtagad to ognangonan pad.
Nokogdongan to kagi rin, nokouma si Hudas no sagboka no hibatoon to sikan sampulu woy darua. Nanduma ki Hudas ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no ogkomkomon dan ka moirob dan woy ka mgo kayu no lamposoy. Tibo soin no mgo otow, nigpuun dio to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad, mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy ka mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu.
bu-ang
No ian ogpohondioon ku si Tikiku to kaniu oyow ogkabuligan ka goinawa now su igpohitaga rin kaniu ko ogkoomonu koy kai.
Nò, kuntoon, ogkohimu no ogpakabulig si Hisus kanta ko ogkool-ologan ki ni Satanas su nabayaan ni Hisus ka igkabaybayari rin no nigligkat to pog-ol-olog ni Satanas kandin, di waro makasalo si Hisus.
otow
Ko konad og-anak, ogtangkod on.
Du-on a to longod nu; du-on a kai.
Ka goti-an no agoloy, igpako-on to iam no nig-anak oyow ogkabongkag ka langosa no nigmalibuson to diralom.
Si Hisus, nigtabak no waro nig-atu. Kagi rin, “Ko nig-uubat a pa, titigus kow kai to tangkaan to soin no mgo otow to ubat ku. Di ko malogot ka kagi ku atag, manio naan to nigtagpi on a nu?”
langgà
Ka sikan no mgo otow no ogsasowsasow kaniu, ogkoiling to maroyow lagboy ka batasan dan kaniu, di maroot so tuud dan su ian goinawa ran ko og-ongkoran a now oyow sikandan on ka ogkasagman now.
No, duon sagboka no duma ni Hisus no niggulabut din ka moirob din woy nigtigbas din ka talinga to oripon to Labow to mgo Talagpanubad no nasipsip on.
gibis
Ko ogtongoson to doun ka kumang, oghirosonan ta to ogbolodbod ka igbanggut no balagon.
labod
bag-od
Woy ampui a now oyow ogkabuligan a to Magboboot oyow ogkatul-id woy ogkoutas ka lituk to ignangonnangon ku.
Mgo sulod, kono ki ogmugongmugong to duma ta su oyow kono ki ogkabobootan to iglogpad. Pamminog kow! Si Hisu Kristu no ian Talagboot, duon on to gumawan.
Kono kow og-iman no kono kow oglogporan tongod to si Abraham ka minuna now. Ogkagian ku sikaniu no ogkohimu atag to Magboboot ko ogkagian din do ka soin no mgo batu no ogkohimu no mgo pinanganak ni Abraham ko ogkoiniatan din.
Nigpohondio ki Hisus ka duma no mgo Parisiu woy duma no mgo sakup to Kinalabawan no Datu no si Hirodis oyow oggawayan dan porom si Hisus to kagi rin.
pusta
Og-abalangon ku ka baloy no nighimu ni Jeremy di warò pad igkabayad ku.
bolongbolong
No duon sagboka no nigduma ki Hisus no nigtigbas to uripon to Kinalabawan no Igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu no nasipal on ka kawanan no talinga rin.
tikang
Patingangag si Sabina, Pitikanon.
puag
sombig
Pogkapawo, nanlimudlimud on ka mgo pogbuyagon to mgo Hudiu, woy ka mgo otow no tahuronon, woy ka mgo talag–anad to Balaod dan.
tabò
taga
Agad ko duon sampulu no malan no otow no og-anad kaniu to pog-unug ki Hisu Kristu, di kono no mohon-ing ka amoy now. Ian su sikanak do ka nohimu on no amoy now to ogtuu kandin su sikanak ka nignangonnangon kaniu nokani to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus no nigtuu kow on kandin.
‘Sikaniu no matig Bitlihim no og-ugpodio to probinsia to Huda, labow kow to mgo duma no mgo lunsud su dio to kaniu ogpuun ka songo Igbuyag no og-alap to mgo otow ku no kapunganan ni Israil.’ ”
banga
Di kagi ni Pedro to, “Buyag, kono a su waro a makakoon to agad nokoy no ngalap no ogpakaligsom kanami no mgo Hudiu.”
Pamo-pò to lagut
Ko du-on ka niglanowlanow no woig no konò ogko-oti-an, sikan ka bala-as su warò pad aligbat makamoti.
Ka manuk no ogdaralu ogto-ob ka sulang din.
Songo allow, nalibulung nighutuk ka mohon-ing no mgo otow dio ki Hisus. Ko warad on ka mgo bohow ran nig-umow ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din no kagi rin kandan to,
hindang
Kagi pa ni Hisus to, “Nataga a to soini no insugu to Amoy ku, sikan ian ka ogligkatan to kouyagan now no waro katamanan. No, ka ogkagion ku, ian ka igsugu to Amoy ku.”
Di nigtabak man do si Abraham to, ‘Ko kono dan ogpamminogan ka kagi ni Moisis woy ka ingkasulat dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, songo kono dan ogtuu agad ko duon otow no ogkootawan on no ogligkat to mgo nammatoy.’ Sikan ian ka tabak ni Abraham” kagi ni Hisus.
bogbog
Ka boi, waro nigtolom to sikan no kagi to iglukos din to ogkatuman ka sikan no allow ko og-ulì.
Tinabi ka. Tinabion ka babuy.
pinota
sayow
uyag
bulang
Nigtabak ku sikandin to, “Igbuyag, sikoykow ka nataga ko hontow sikandan.” Woy nigtabak sikandin to, “Sikandan ka mgo otow no nig-aguanta to dakol no mgo igkabaybayari ran dio to kalibutan no ogligkat to pogtuu ran to Magboboot. Ka mgo salo dan, oglipuwasan to langosa to Nati no Karniru no namatoy on tongod kandan. Ian ogkounawa to niglabaan dan ka mgo manggad dan dio to langosa rin no nigmaputi on ka kinabo dan su naawo on ka mgo salo dan.
Di ko waro a makasabut to kinagian to songo otow, kono koy ogpakarumaruma su kono koy ogpokogsabut.
Nasagop ka kanta no baloy to woig.
Nahallok lagboy ka sikan no mgo boi no nokounduk. Kagi to sika darua no otow to, “Manio to duon now pad ogpammitawa ka manokal kai to pigsabalan to namatoy?
“Waro kow makabawi,” kagi ni Hisus, “su kulang ka pogtuu now to Magboboot. Doromdoma now ka soini no ignangon ku kaniu, ko duon pogtuu now agad ogkounawa do to kolintok to bogas to longa, ogkohimu no ogsuguon now ka soini no bubungan to oyow ogkahalin no ogkahalin ian.
Nangolibot si Pedro no kagi rin, “Logpari a to Magboboot ko kono no malogot ka kagi ku to wara a man mogtokod to sikan no otow no oghingaranan now.”
Og-agbas ka masakit to sosolobon woy ka poka ni Anggam.
paggabak
Ogbakuli-on ku rò ka asu ku su napogos a rò ka nigduad ku su warò ogkoimuan ku.
Ogsayoon ta ka Magboboot su sikandin ka mabogbog to waro katamanan.
Ligkat dod to pogtuu, agad to buyag on si Abraham woy to kono ogpakapanganak si Sara, nigpangiram dod su nigbogayan sikandin to kabogbogan. Ian su nigsalig si Abraham to ogtumanon to Magboboot ka innangon din to og-anak si Sara.
kotong
sulu
Pogkaponga to pog–ampu dan to poglangkad to pogkoon, no pigtorongan to bolad dan si Saulo woy ki Birnabi no nig–ampuan dan sikandan, woy pinohipanow ran on.
Nigsu-ut to inoy; malaab so bakò
Paragas niggongonan ni Hisus ka bolad ni Pedro no nigkagi to, “Doisok pad naan ka pogsalig nu koddi. Manio to nigtambabo kad?”
“Nokoy buwa,” kagi ni Hisus, “ka ogpounawaan ta ka Pogsugu to Magboboot? Nokoy buwa ka mgo pananglitan ta?
Ka lubid to asu ka ogpakabungku oyow du-on do ogkataman.
Dokad di, ko duon boi no og-ampu woy ko ognangon to kagi no ogligkat to Magboboot di waro mogtorong to ulu rin, ogpakasipod to asawa rin su waro igpapitow to asawa rin no igsugu kandin. No ogkounawa rod ko natabulugan ka ulu rin.
No ian to sikan ka nigpohimu to Magboboot ki Hisu Kristu, oyow kuntoon, duon igpamalogot to Magboboot to maroyow sikandin woy igkaruwa, imbogoy rin si Hisus to oyow agad hontow no ogtuu kandin, oghimuon din no maroyow dio to tangkaan din.
lala
Nigdani si Satanas ki Hisus oyow ol-ologan din sikandin. Kagi ni Satanas ki Hisus to, “Ko koykow ka Anak to Magboboot, sugua nu soini no mgo batu su oyow ogbaluy no paan no koonon nu.”
Nigtabak ka nabawian to, “Pigsugu a to sikan no otow no nigbawi koddi to ogpohipanowan a.”
boluy
Kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “To nighipanow kow ganna, nokoy ka igpanangnangonoy now?” No nakasagdok sikandan no ogkakitaan dio to langlanguwan dan to masakit lagboy so goinawa ran.
sulambì
Nò, nigbabansagon ka nabutud to, “Wow Hisus, pinanganak ni Dabid, kohoy-ui a nu!”
supsup
Sikanak no si Huan, nignangonan a ko songo monu kohon-ing ka ogpangotoban to bukod dan no og-indanan to Magboboot no sakup din. 144,000 tibo ka ogpangotoban no ogligkat to sikan no sampulu woy daruwa no mgo kapunganan ni Israil.
No og-awoson to ogmaroyawon ta ro ka ignangon ta to mgo otow oyow duon pulus to sikan no igkagi ta oyow ogkabuligan ka mgo otow no ogpamminog. Ian su og-awoson no ogkatou ki to litos no igkatabak ta to agad hontow no og-inso kanta tongod to pogtuu ta ki Hisus.
Pogkouma ran on, kagi ni Pablo kandan to, “Sikaniu, nataga kow to tibo no batasan ku ka dio a pad to kaniu nokani no nigligkat to allow to pogdatong ku dio to probinsia to Asia, taman kuntoon.
Ko du-on tanò no ogkalunow, ogkalopang ka kayu.
songo
bogbog
Di agad to ogkohimu poron kanak to ogbogayan a now to pogkouyag ku no dio ad, di waro a man nigbuyu. Agad to soini no sulat ku kuntoon, kono no tuud ku to oyow duon igbogoy now kanak. Agad ko ogkamatoy a to gutas, madmaroyow poron ko ogkaawo pa ka igkasayo-sayo ku to kono a ogpabayad to pog-anad ku kaniu.
limas
Pipisan
Igpasasindog noy on si Buanbuan
“Di duon pad dangob no suguonon din no nokouma no kagi rin to igbuyag din to, ‘Buyag, soinid on ka salapi no ingalat nu dini to koddi. Nig-ay-ayaran ku tongosa to manggad no insabuk kud on.
daw
bonsag
Nò, ka igkalima no diwata to Magboboot, nighiup to kandin no bungag. Woy duon nigkita ku no bituon no tahan on no noulug kai to tano ligkat to langit no warad on layag din. Nigbogayan sikandin to susi no igpulas to bitu no kono ogkatogkad ka karalomi rin.
Si Taganay ka niggalatan to anak ni Lita.
“Ko duon goinawa nu to mgo otow no songo duon goinawa ran koykow, manio to ogsayoon kow porom to Magboboot? Agad ka mgo makasasalo, songo duon man goinawa ran to mgo otow no songo duon goinawa ran kandan.
indos
Ko nigdatong on dio, piglansangan dan sikandin dio to krus. Songo duon darua no lukos no impalansang dan to mgo krus dio to managkiliran ni Hisus.
Agad to koykow no pogkasabuti, kono ka ogpakasalo ko sikan ka oghimuon nu, maroyow ko kono nu ro ig-uwang dio to duma nu to oglitos to koykow no goinawa to oghimu su sikoykow woy ka Magboboot do ka ogkataga. Ogkarago ka otow no kono ogpakaruwaruwa ko litos ka oghimuon din.
Ka pakow to niug du-on tikog no ogkoimu no walis.
“Ignangon ku kaniu ka soin no nangnangonon kuntoon oyow ko ogkatuman on soini, ogtuu kow on to koddi ian ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan.”
togung
Uy-uyunan ta ko boi no konò oggustu.
bigtas
gotol
Ko nigsakoy ki to diip ligkat to Valencia, du-on ki to Bagunta-as ogpagtonga-an din to Nasuli. Ka sikan, nakataliwarò to nigsakoy.
Paspas ka.
Ian na-an dò oghulingon dan ka ogmamopolod na-an dò to kamot dan.
Hanow ta.
pad
Nokani no nouripon kow pad to mgo maroot no koiniatan now, waro kow pad masakup to mgo maroyow no batasan.
Nigbingbing to inoy ka apongag to anak din su konò og-ulì ka ungud ogli-ag.
Tutua kad to babuy.
Nò, ogkabolongbolong ka mgo otow no matuwarong so goinawa ran dio to Magboboot no ogtabak to, ‘Buyag, kon-u noy ogkitaa sikoykow no niggutasan kad woy namaraan kad woy nigpakoon noy woy nigpoinum noy sikoykow?
Du-on nigsinundul no songo ogpanong-ow di pitromak ka igtong-ow
Sikan dod ka innangon ni Dabid dongan. No innangon din to duon igkarago to otow no ogkohimu on to Magboboot no maroyow dio to tangkaan din ligkat to pogtuu to sikan no otow, kono ogligkat to mgo hinimuan din.
lipat
patas
gastu
bayukan
itu-os
Kagi to batò, "Anggam, matoon ka amoy ku diò to baloy.
Pogkaponga, nigpaagbotan ni Hisus ka kagi rin to, “Amoy ku no dio to Langit, igsalig ku dio to koykow ka gimukud ku,” no pogkaponga rin to kagi rin nabigtawan on ka goinawa rin.
tingkalusan
siksik
Konò ogbubulung su kasakitan.
Nò, ka sikan no mgo otow no og-amut-amut dio to kaniu, songo ogkounawa rod to sikan oghimuon dan. Ian su ligkat to ogkakitaan dan dio to mgo karoot dan, duon ka oghimuon dan no ogpakaligsom to mgo lawa ran woy oglomot to katondanan no ogligkat to Magboboot. Woy ogdooton dan ka mgo malayag no diwata to Magboboot.
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, og-awoson no ogpoomot ki no ogtuman to igpohimu to Magboboot kanta no igmalogot to naabin kinow rin no sakup din. Ko sikan ian ka ogtumanon ta, kono ki ogpakasuwoy to malogot no dalan.
sigpit
Ko hon-om no gotad ka isdà, sikan ka logob ta to hon-om ki no mgo otow.
dungkò
Natokow ki su warò ki no-inso-i.
Ka batò no ogkawo-kawò, konò ogkatolon ko ogpinnu-u.
Di nigpohitagaan to Magboboot ka mgo talagnangon to kagi rin to kono no sikandan ka ogkabuligan to sikan no innangon dan dongan, di sikanta kuntoon ka ogkabuligan. No ka sikan no impanoy ran inangon, songo ingkanangon on kuntoon su duon mgo otow no nigsugu to Magboboot oyow ogkanangonan kow to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu. No ka Gimukud to Magboboot no nigligkat to Langit ka nigpohitaga kandan ko nokoy ka igkanangonnangon dan. No ka mgo diwata to Magboboot, songo ogkoiniat no ogpakasabut poron sikandan to sikan no ignangonnangon dan.
Dio to sikan no baloy no anaranan to mgo og-ampu duon lukos no nigsoloran to busow no nigbabansagon to pogkagi rin to,
koy
No sikan dod ian ka ogligkatan to og-awoson to ogbayaran ta ka mgo igpabayad to gobirnu kanta su ka mgo otow no og-alap to katondanan to pogsugu kai to kalibutan, ogkounawa to ka Magboboot ka nigsugu kandan ko ogtumanon dan ka katondanan dan.
Ka lituk to mannalinga ka allow, ogkataman to talinga ka allow ka ogbandog.
Sikaniu no mgo uripon, ungod kow ogpaagad-agad to tagtuun kaniu, kono do to oyow ogmaroyow ka pogpitow ran kaniu. Di og-awoson to kono oglimanglimang ka goinawa now to ogtalabau su ligkat to dakol no pogtahud now to Magboboot.
Duon dod dangob no kinagian to Magboboot to Anak din. Kagi, “Sikoykow, Lagboy no Igbuyag, ka nighimu to soini no kalibutan dongan. Agad ka tibo no dio to langit, ka koykow ro no bolad ka nighimu.
tungul
Ogpamuyu a to bonut nu su ogtitingkikan a su oyow duon hapuy ta.
tonton
Nigkagian ni Hisus ka mgo otow no ogmaminnuu sikandan dio to toolan. Pigpurut din ka sika lalima malison no paan woy darua no ngalap, woy niglonghag sikandin dio to langit woy nigpasalamatan din ka Magboboot to sikan no koonon. Niglotiblotib din ka paan woy impambogoy to mgo hibatoon din to mgo otow.
Ian ku ignangon kaniu, mgo sulod, ka soi lawa ta no nohimu no sapu woy langosa, kono ogpakaamut uromo to pandatuan to Magboboot dio to Langit. Ian su kono ogkohimu no ka lawa ta no ogkamolu, ogkabogayan to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
Woy og-awoson ta ka batasan no ogpakabogoy to maroyow no pog-ugpo ta, no ogtantanuran ta ka kanta ro no labot woy ogtalabau kinow to oyow duon on litos to pog-ugpo ta. Sikan ka tahan no insugu noy kaniu nokani.
Agad ko ogkapurut to otow ka tibo no karoyawan kai to tano, nokoy ka pulus ko ian ogkaawo ka kouyagan ta dio to Magboboot? Waro man pulus su waro litos no igsaliu ta to kouyagan ta dio to Magboboot.
Ka otow no wolok, mananoy ogkalituk su ogsangatsangat to ogkagi
soki
lunggun
malibutut
dugnal
Ka otow no ogboboli to bogas dio to Patil no waro bogas su no-ubusan ka mgo tindahan, bunuli ro ian ka nighondio no waro naboli rin no bogas.
kuit
oyow na-an
Nò, to kanak no doromdom, kono oglabow kanak ka sikan no mgo otow no ogkabantugan now no og-uubat no ognangon to suguanon ni Hisus sikandan.
singut
dolmol
Doromdoma now ka nokohun-a no mgo igbuyag now su sikandan ka nig-anad kaniu to kinagian to Magboboot. Woy songo doromdoma now ka mgo batasan dan taman to kamatayon dan. No unugi now ka malogot no pogtuu ran ki Hisus.
nanoy
lodlod
Nò, to tigbogas on to ubas, nigsugu ka tagtuun to duma no mgo suguonon din dio to pinamula din oyow og-angayon dan ka kandin no igtalad.
sakoru
pangatubung
Tapus to nokogsungit on ka lukos woy boi, nokogtu-un on no nokog-asawa.
os-os
sagpì
Ko og-ma-am-amanoloy ki to duma ta, ko du-on maintok no problima, maga-an dò ogka-awò.
Ian su duon kinagian to Magboboot no ingkasulat dongan to, “Su sikanak ka Magboboot no kono ogkamatoy, tu-tuu ian ka ignangon ku kaniu to tibo no mgo otow, agad hontow, ogpakaluhud to tangkaan ku. Woy tibo ogpakanangon to kanak ian ka Magboboot.”
no-u
Di wa din kohoy-ui ka sika no suguanon. Inpapirisu rin taman to ogpakabayad to utang din.
bolù
Malogot ian to nigdaralu sikandin woy magaan on poron ogkamatoy. Di noulian on sikandin su nohoy-uan to Magboboot. Woy songo nohoy-uan a su, ko namatoy pa sikandin, ogkatimulan poron ka masakit to goinawa ku.
Ko ogpangilian, nig-ugpò koy on diò to bubungan. Og-atolan noy ko du-on mangayow. Og-il-ilian.
Nigbaghotan din to pognangon to sika nigsayow to, “Malogot ka soini no ogkagion ku koykow to agad nokoy no ogbuyuon nu,” kagi rin, “igbogoy ku koykow.”
Si Ipaparas ka nig-anad kaniu to sikan no nangnangonon. Sikandin, sulod ta to pogtuu no suguanon dod ni Kristu no indakoli noy to goinawa. Ogkasaligan sikandin to ogtuman to sugu ni Kristu, no inliwan si Ipaparas kanami to ogbulig kaniu no waro koy maayun to ogbulig.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Wara a moghondini to ogbulig to mgo otow no matuwarong ko kono ian ku ogbuligan ka mgo makasasalo oyow ogbalbalawan dan ka mgo batasan dan.”
Ko konò ogpakatakow ka ogsilag, og-usigon kid no maro-ot ka pogpitow ran kanta.
Ko nokoy no tambal no ogpakabatuk to masakit, ian ka ma-agbot no tambal.
Du-on otow no nokogpikitpikit ka saosow rin.
No niglingi si Hisus to boi no kagi ni Hisus ki Simon to, “Ogkitoon nu ka soini no boi. Ganna, to nigsolod a to baloy nu, waro a nu bogayi to woig no ighugas to paa ku unawa to batasan ta, di sikandin atag, nigsubiran din ka paa ku to mgo luwo din no nigpunasan din to bulbul din.
kogukkoguk
Ogpapangumusta a ki Apilis. Natagaan on to masalig sikandin to pogsugu ni Hisu Kristu. Songo ogpapangumusta a woy ki Aristobulu.
asun
Duon lukos no ibungon no nigdani ki Hisus no nigluhud to tangkaan din no nigkagi to, “Buyag, ko ogkoiniatan nu, ogkabawian a nu bag to soini no kogang ku oyow ogkaawo ka igkaligsomi ku dio to tangkaan to mgo otow.”
bagbag
Naanad on si Moisis to tibo no katouanan to mgo taga Ehipto woy mabantug sikandin su dakol ka katouanan din to mgo hinimuan woy to mgo kinagian.
Ko nig-ugpò ki to lunsud, to kara baloy du-on mgo olatan no mgo alad no ian pagtonga-an.
Tongod to soin, sikaniu ka ogkalogparan to kamatayon to tibo no nohimatayan ligkat to poghimatoy ki Abil no wa salo din taman to poghimatoy ki Sakarias no anak ni Barakia, no nighimatayan now dio to olatan to baloy to Magboboot woy to tubaranan to mgo igtubad.
Warò nano-u.
dusdus
Di nigtabak si Hisus to, “Ko ogkatangkob on ka allow no ogpamaluwag ka langit ognangon kow on to, ‘Maroyow ka allow asolom su malalab so langit.’
langit
Nokani nounawa ki pad to mgo karniru no nalagak. Di kuntoon, nakitaan kid on woy nokouli kid on to Magboboot no ian Talagbantoy no ogkatou no ogtanudtanud kanta.
Songo nigkagi rin kandan, “Duon dod ka sika papitu no malison no paan no impakoon to hop-at no libu no mgo otow. Pila no bukag ka naponu no samo?” Nigtabak dan to, “Papitu.”
No ka diò to kalasara, du-on insabuk diò to aliwarò no songo og-a-anamag.
Kagi ni Hisus no intabak to kagi dut goinawa to tagbanwa to, “Simon, duon ignangon ku koykow.” Kagi to tagbanwa to, “Nokoy naan Maistru ka ignangon nu koddi?”
tongos
Sikan ian, dakol ka igkasasow ku kaniu, mgo sulod, su inat to warad pulus ka tibo no in-anad ku kaniu tongod ki Hisus.
Malasi koy ogkabaybayari di kono koy ogkaroog. Woy duon allow no kono koy ogpakabatuk to dalan noy di kono ogkaawo ka pogsalig noy to Magboboot.
Ka batasan ko ogsanggì, ian dò ogsanggì ka noko-orok.
ligid
hilas
Ogkohimu soini su oyow ogkatuman on ka innangon to dongan no talagnangon to Magboboot. Kagi,
Upo-i nu.
baba
Nò, mohon-ing no mgo otow no nigdinog to soin no kagi ni Hisus, nigtuu on sikandan kandin
hirap
Og-atangan ku ka ig-abalangi din
Di si Maria Magdalina, waro makaruma. Ogsisinogow ro dio to libuwason to sabalanan. Pogsisinogow niglukbu oyow soilangan din dio to solod to sabalanan,
Dokad di, su ian now ro igkasasow ka mgo kinagian, woy mgo ngaran to kaniu ro no mgo Balaod, kono ad ogboboot to sikan.”
gulub
Ogpatokawan to og-alamaraan oyow ogko-ubus dan oghimatoy.
Ka sikan dod no allow, nig-awo si Hisus dio to baloy no nighondio sikandin to ilis to Lanow to Galilia. Pogpokouma rin dio nigpinnuu dio to ilis to oyow og-anad.
Ka tatolu ku to pogligot to lubid no nigbotu to ma-agbot.
pa
bubungan no linapawon
Nakabayo sikandan dio to loin no ugpaan no oghingaranan to Samaria no oghondio to Galilia.
linatungan
Woy songo nig–amut si Anas no ian Labow to mgo Talagpanubad to sikan no Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu. Songo duon si Kaipas, woy ka sangoy ni Huan, woy si Alihandro, woy duon duma no mgo sulod ni Anas.
Nigbatbatan kinow ni Simon Pedro tongod to allow no an–anayan sagmana to Magboboot ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. Ian su tuud din to duon mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no ogpasakup on to kandin no ngaran,” kagi ni Santiago.
bayò
Nig-iloban dan pad si Hisus woy nigpurut dan ka sikan no tukod no imbogoy ran no kara sagboka kandan, niglamposan dan ka ulu ni Hisus.
Ko duon otow dio to kaniu no ogkatou to og-udling woy mougsob to pogkasabuti rin, og-awoson to igpapitow rin to mgo otow ka maroyow no mgo batasan din woy to kono din igdoogdoog ka sikan no katouanan din.
Sikan ka kagi ni Hisus kandan. Nò, duon dod kagi rin kandan. Kagi rin, “Nighirogo on ka duma ta no si Lasaru; di oghondian ta oyow ogpukowon ku pad sikandin.”
Nokoy buwa ka lituk to ‘kono ogkalugoy?’ Wa ki makasabut to kalitukan to kagi rin,” kagi to mgo hibatoon din.
di waro agad songo aslag no bulbul now no ogkalugak.
Nò mgo sulod, pamminog kow. Ko duon duma ta no nigtuu no ogpakasalo, sikanta no waro igkabalabag to goinawa ta dio to Magboboot ka ogbulig kandin oyow ogkabalbalawan ka goinawa rin. Di oghimulungan ta to ogpasabut woy ogtantanuran ta ka kanta no goinawa su nahan pa ko songo ogkool-ologan ki ni Satanas.
pawing
Ogganuyon ta ka balagon ko og-ulì ki diò to baloy.
Ko du-on ogsukut to kuddò di naruad, agad nokoy ka igbogoy to nakapurut to kuddò
Ko tongod to baloy no og-awos to ogmatikangon, og-alikan to nanoynanoy su awos to ogsongolan.
Dokad di, sikanta atag ka noindanan no tu-tuu ian no anak to Magboboot su ligkat to pogbulig to Gimukud din, ogsayoon ta sikandin woy nasagboka kinow on ki Hisu Kristu no kono ta ogsaligan ko nokoy ka igpohimu ta poron to lawa ta.
Ko nigkita ni Pedro sikandin, nig-inso din ki Hisus to, “Buyag, nokoy naan on ka ogkoumaan to kandin uromo?”
Di nigtabak si Pistu to, “Ogbabantayan dod si Pablo dio to Sisaria, no magaan a ro og–uli dio.
tirong
datù
opad
bagtad
Ko ogdaging ka bungag no ogligkat dio to Magboboot no igmaganangon to soini ka mohuri no allow ta kai to soi kalibutan, magaan do ogkaliwani ka lawa ta. Ogkounawa to songo pogpolo-polo do bag to mata ta, su ko ogdaging ka bungag, ogkouyag on ka mgo nammatoy no nigtuu no ogkaliwanan on ka lawa ran to sikan no kono ogkamatoy no lawa. No sikanta no waro pad nammatoy, songo ogkaliwanan ka lawa ta to ogkounawa ro kandan.
Ka Magboboot ka nighimu to tibo to sikan su ligkat to nighimu ni Hisus, ka Magboboot ka nigpoul-ulioy on to goinawa ta kandin. No nigbogayan koy rin to katondanan oyow ogpakanangonnangon koy to duma no mgo otow oyow ogkohimu no songo ogpoul-ulioy on ka goinawa ran to Magboboot.
Nò, ian igtabak ku kandan to, ‘Wara a mogtokod kaniu. Awo kow kai to koddi, kaniu no mgo makasasalo.’ ”
Ka batò ko ogsakopuon ta no ogpabbi-ad to poka rin, og-ali-ad ka batò.
kotkot
indanan
balut
indanan
tuluy
abug
“Kono kow ian ogkahallok,” kagi ni Hisus, “Hondio kow to mgo hibatoon ku woy nangoni now to oghondio sikandan to Galilia. Dia a ran ogkitaa.”
Nig-utusan ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din to oyow kono dan ignangon to agad hontow no sikandin ian ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan to og-udling uromo.
Masi-ot ka ngipon din
bakokò
Matinok ka ma-ung.
Natuluy ka so-ini darua. Naruma.
Ian su oyow ogkabat–awan nu ka pogdoromdom dan oyow oghalin on ka goinawa ran dio to Magboboot no ogkoongkoran dan on ka marusilom woy ogkaawo on sikandan to katondanan ni Satanas. Ian su oyow, ligkat to pogtuu ran kanak, ogkapasayluan ka mgo salo dan woy ogpakaamut to mgo otow no nig–alam to Magboboot no mgo sakup din,’ kagi ni Hisus kanak.
Di agad nokoy, waro ogpakaatang kanta to dakol no pogkohoy-u ni Hisu Kristu kanta su agad nokoy no ogkabayaan ta, ogpakaampow-ampow kinow to kohirapi ta su ogbuligan kinow ni Hisu Kristu no ogkohoy-u kanta.
Togkara’n ko maralom.
Woy nighutuk man do makitoi to lalimma no gatus no mgo nigtuu no niglimudlimud. No to sikan no nakakita ki Hisus, manalingboka ro ka namatoy, mohon-ing dod ka waro namatoy no insulat ka soini.
“Kono ki ogsamsam to sikan,” woy ko kagi ran to, “Kono ki ogpakatimtim to sikan no ogkakoon,” woy ko ogkagi ran to, “Do kow oggongon to sooyo.”
Ian su ian ku innangon kaniu ka sikan no in-anad kanak to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus to, ka sikan no marusilom no nigpanabod ni Hudas si Hisus, nigkokoon si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din. No nigpurut din ka songo malison no paan.
Ian dò ogpa-abinon to ulu ka nigbaba to babuy.
Pogpitow ku man do no duon magintalunan no niglibuwas dio to dagat. Sampulu ka sukat din woy papitu ka ulu rin. Woy to tag sagboka no sukat din, duon tangkulu. Woy duon ngaran no ingkasulat to sikan no tag sagboka no ulu rin no ogdoot to Magboboot.
Di waro makasabut ka mgo hibatoon din to kalitukan to in-anad din woy nahallok to og-inso ko nokoy ka kalitukan.
Nigtinawo ni Pedro ka bolad din no nigpasasindog din. Woy pig–umow rin ka mgo otow no nigtuu lagkos to mgo balu, no impapitow rin on si Dorkas no nouyag on.
Ko pananglitan, pogboot to Magboboot to ogkabayaan ta ka igkabaybayari, madmaroyow ko, ka igkabaybayari, ogligkat to nohimu ki to maroyow, no kono ogligkat to duon nohimu ta no maroot.
hi
Nangoni nu ka sikan no mgo balu to soini no ig-anad ku oyow ogpaagad-agad sikandan oyow waro ogpakasamili kandan.
lumbian
To duon a rod kai to soin no kalibutan, koddi ka igbat-ow to sumsumanan to mgo otow.”
Ko ogdooton koy, ian noy ro igtabak ka maroyow no kagi. No taman kuntoon, ogkoiling koy to mgo lagut no ogsonsonon to mgo otow no waro pad nigtuu.
bulus
Ka ugis no antabun, warò solug no batok su tibulus no mapotì.
Kagi to boi to, “Su nigtuman ka to innangon nu, nigtolom ad to konò ka no ubaton no otow.”
Sikan ian to duon impasulat to Magboboot ki Usias. Kagi rin to, “Duon mgo otow no kono no sakup ku, di oghimuon ku sikandan no sakup. Woy duon mgo otow no nokani waro ku indakoli to goinawa, di kuntoon, indakoli kud to goinawa.
Agad Hudiu ka sikan no kono no malogot no mgo suguanon, su songo Hudiu a rod man. Woy ko pinanganak ni Israil sikandan, songo pinanganak a rod ni Israil. Pinanganak sikandan ni Abraham di songo pinanganak a rod ni Abraham.
Ian su, ko ogbogoy ka Magboboot, ogkohimu no songo ogpakanangonnangon koy dio to duma no mgo ugpaan no waro pad moumoi to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus. No og-awoson to oyow kono koy og-abin no igparakoldakol to kanami no lawa, su duon impasulat to Magboboot dongan. Kagi rin to,
tumbid
golong
lotoman
gotas
Di impalibuwas on ni Pedro ka tibo no mgo otow. No nigluhud sikandin no nig–ampu to Magboboot. Pogkaponga, nigtangkaan din ka lawa to namatoy no kagi rin to, “Tabita, onow kad on.” Inogo on no nighimata on si Dorkas. No pogpitow rin ki Pedro, nigpinpinnuu.
di kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Awoson ku to oyow songo ognangonan ku ka mgo otow dio to duma no mgo lunsud. Ka ignangon ku ka soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon bahin to Pogsugu to Magboboot su sikan ian ka inhongkai ku to soini no kalibutan,” kagi ni Hisus.
No to sikan no lunsud, waro agad nokoy no igmasakit no ogligkat to igpanungayow to Magboboot. Ian su ka pinnuuanan to pandatuan to Magboboot woy to sikan no ogkohingaranan to Nati no Karniru, duon to sikan no lunsud. No ka Magboboot ka ogsimboon to tibo no mgo sakup din.
bagò
Ka maroot no batasan to sikan no mgo otow no og-amut-amut kaniu, ogpakaligsom to poglimudlimud now ko ogkoon kow to pagkoonan no igpasulodsulod woy to igparoromdomon now to pogkamatoy ni Hisu Kristu. Ian su waro igkasipod dan su ian dan og-umalagon ka igbulung ka ogkoibogan to lawa ran. No waro pulus now ka sikan, su ogkounawa sikandan to mgo salagapun no oglayap to kalamag no waro uran no ogkaalap dan. Woy songo ogkounawa rod sikandan to mgo kayu no kono ogbogas ko allow dan on poron to ogpamogas su lagboy on ian no nammatoy su nigpamagnus on.
Ka mgo Koot-otawan to mgo ugpaan to soini no kalibutan, ogkabat-awan to layag to sikan no lunsud. No ka mgo igbuyag to mgo ugpaan to soini no kalibutan, og-alapon dan ka mgo mahal no kalaglagan dan dio to sikan no lunsud.
Nò, nokani duon papitu no patalahari kai to kanami. Mgo lukos tibo sikandan. Nig-asawa ka panganoy no namatoy on no waro anak dan.
Kagi pa ni Hisus, “Og-anaron kow kuntoon tongod to sikan no kayu no igira. Ko duon on ka mgo tugbung to sika kayu woy inuburan, nataga ki to marani ka gulabung.
tabang
Di mgo sulod, pigbogayan ad to Magboboot to mohirap no oggoramon ku oyow kono a ogpakaparakoldakol to goinawa ku no ogligkat to sikan no mohon-ing no impohitaga to Magboboot to sikan no impakita rin kanak dio to langit. Ka sikan, ian ogkounawa ko duon igmasakit to lawa ku no igsasowsasow ni Satanas kanak. No ian to oyow kono a ogpakaparakoldakol dio to kanak no pogdoromdom.
Nabiuk dò ka so-og ka nig-unturan to mabogat di warò nagopù.
pamalit
Malogot ka ignangon ku kaniu, agad ka labow no igbuyag no si Solomon dongan no lagboy no salapian sikandin woy mabantug sikandin, waro kinabo din no nokounawa to karayow to sikan no mgo bulak.
nigpohitaga kandin to kono pad ogkamatoy taman to ogkitoon din on ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan no intaga dongan to Magboboot no igpohondini rin to tano.
sulu to asu
kalubanan
Ko si Hisus, duon dio to Bitania to baloy to sika Simon no niggoram to ibung di nabawian on. Ko ogkokoon woy si Hisus, nigsolod ka songo boi no ogkomkomon din ka songo taguanan no nohimu to songo kalasi no batu no oghingaranan to alabaster. Naponu to ogkounawa to lana no mohomut no oghingaranan to nardu no mahal lagboy. Nò, niggopu din ka liog to sikan no taguanan no nigbus-ug din ka tibo dio to ulu ni Hisus.
Kagi pa ni Hisus kuwo to mgo ibuyag to Hudiu, “Malogot ka soini ogkagion ku kaniu. Sika otow no ogpamminog to kagi ku woy ogtuu on to Amoy ku no Magboboot no nigsugu koddi to oghondini a to tano, ogkouyag on ka sikan no otow no waro katamanan dio to langit. Kono ogkalogparan ka sikan no otow su nakalipuas to kamatayon din no duon on kouyagan din.”
Allow–allow nigparumdumooy sikandan no nanhondio to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu. Woy niglimudlimud dio to mgo baloy ran oyow ogkokoon sikandan to harina no igparoromdom to pogkamatoy ni Hisus. Woy songo nigkokoon to koonon. No dakol ka pogpasalamat to goinawa ran woy ka ingkarago dan.
Ka bakal, tago-oran no og-unturan ko oghimu ki to lawa to baloy.
Kagi ni Satanas ki Hisus to, “Ko sikoykow ka Anak to Magboboot, tinugpu ka dio to tano su duon inkasulat no kagi to Magboboot to, ‘Ogbuligan ka to Magboboot su ogsuguon din ka mgo diwata din no ogtapayoon ka nikandan oyow kono ka ogpakaroog to agad sagboka no batu.’ ”
Sikan ian to nabuligan on ka goinawa noy. Di kono no ka kanami ro no goinawa ka nabuligan, su to pogkita noy to dakol no igkarago ni Titu, lagboy koy nakatukow to igkarago din. Ian su, ligkat to nighimu now, naawo on ka kandin no igkasasow kaniu.
Dokad di, kono sikoddi ka duon katondanan to ogbogoy ko hontow ka ogpinnuu to kawanan ku woy ka gibang ku uromo. Ka Magboboot do ka ogbogoy to kandan no nig-indanan din.”
Ko nigdinog ka mgo otow to mgo in-anad ni Hisus, nigkagi ka duma to, “Soini buwa ian ka sika Talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no ogpokohun-a to sikan no ogtagaran ta.”
baratu
kobot
Ka woig no siak, du-on ogligtuasan diò to dibabò.
Kagi ni Natanial, “Umba soini nò! Waro buwa no maroyow ko taga Nasarit!” Kagi ni Pilipi, “Ogduruma ki pad; pitow ka.”
Agad ka mgo doun, songo ogkapadpad ko ogdulu.
bukus
sumansuman
Ogdoromdomon ta si Elias no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan. Sikandin, nounawa ro kanta no otow. Di nigpoomot to nig-ampu sikandin no nigbuyu to oyow kono ogpokouran. No taman to tatolu on no tuid woy hon-om no bulan ka waro mog-uran.
To nig-awo si Hisus dio, to diad on sikandan to dalan, nigsundul kandin ka darua no mgo lukos no nabutud. Nigbabansagon sikandan no kagi ran ki Hisus to, “Kohoy-ui koy bag nikoykow no pinanganak ni Dabid.”
man dò
ongkod
Nò, su ogkohimu to ogpokoiman ka duma no mgo talag-anad now to ogbogayan to pog-ugpo dan, dakoldakol pa man no ogkohimu poron no ogkoimanan noy ko duon ogligkat to kaniu. Agad to ogkoiman noy poron ko duon ogligkat to kaniu, dokad di to waro koy man nigbuyu. Di og-aguantoon noy ro duon atag to agad nokoy su og-awoson noy to kono ogkaatangan ka Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Kristu.
Dokad di, duon dod mgo duma ta no ogtuu ki Hisus no waro pad mataga to sikan no mgo inotow-otow to kono ogpokoomonu kanta. Natagaman dan dod ka tahan no batasan to mgo otow no ogsayo to sikan no mgo inotow–otow. No ko ogkoon sikandan to sikan no ingkatubad, nahan dan no songo ogpakasayo sikandan to sikan no mgo inotow-otow. No ligkat to sikan, ogkaligsoman on ka goinawa ran su moolmol pad ka pogkasabuti ran.
kapkap
du-on
Nataga a man to pinanganak kow ni Abraham. Di duon bantaan now koddi to oghimatayan a now su kono kow man ogtinawo to ig-anad ku kaniu.
ligpis
Ungod ogkabalbalikid ka lawa rin su subla ka masakit din.
Pogkataga ku to nigmasakit so goinawa now su ligkat to sulat ku no impaalap ku kaniu, nokogsondit porom ka goinawa ku. Di naragdagow ro no nigmasakit ka goinawa now. Di kono kud ogsolsolan ka sikan no ingkasulat ku
Patugutugu kow ki Sob-ul to warò igbayad; dokad di du-on dod nana-an.
basag
tipù
Dokad di, ko nokoy ad on kuntoon, nigligkat to pogkohoy-u to Magboboot. No waro maraat ka sikan no ingkohoy-u rin kanak. Sikan ian, dakoldakol pad ka kanak no talabau to sikan no talabau to mgo duma ku no mgo suguanon. Di atag, ka sikan no talabau ku, waro nigligkat to kanak no dayagang di nigligkat to pogkohoy-u to Magboboot no layun igkabogoy kanak.
“Mgo matig Sabulun woy matig Niptali no og-ugpo dio to marani to dakol no lanow no dio dapit to salopan to woig to Hordan woy dio to ugpaan to Galilia,
Woy duon dangob man do no diwata to Magboboot no niglibuwas ligkat to tubaranan to sikan no Dakol no Ampuanan. Sikandin ka diwata no talagtamong to hapuy. Nigmaagbot to ignangon din to diwata no nig-alap to magalang no likung. Kagi rin to, “Ka sikan no likung nu, iggunu nud to sikan no mgo bogas to mgo pinamula no ubas no dio to kalibutan su nohinug on.”
Di duon duma no mgo otow no waro mog-uyun to kagi ni Istiban. Ka sikan, tahan no nan–amut to anaranan no nighingaranan dan to Anaranan to Konad on no Uripon. Sikandan, mgo taga Sirini, mgo taga Alihandria, woy ka duma, dio nigligkat to mgo probinsia to Silisia woy ka Asia. No nigsasindog sikandan woy nigpaap–apuloy ki Istiban.
Di woy ro ogkohimu no duon otow no ogpakanangonnangon kandan ko duon otow no ogsuguon to Magboboot oyow ogpokohondio. Di duon otow no pigsugu din su duon ingkasulat dongan to talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot. Kagi rin to: “Maroyow lagboy ka pogkouma to mgo otow no og-alap-alap to Maroyow no Nangnangonon.”
Sampulu woy hop-at no mgo kapunganan ligkat ki Abraham taman ki Dabid. Songo sampulu woy hop-at no mgo kapunganan ligkat ki Dabid taman to allow to pogkaalap to mgo matig Israil dio to Babilonia. Taman to pog-anak ki Hisu Kristu songo duon sampulu woy hop-at no mgo kapunganan.
sirula
No nig-udlingan ni Hisus sikandin no kagi rin, “Ko nu nangoni ka agad hontow di oghondio kad nasi to talagpanubad woy ipapitow nu kandin to warad ka ibung to lawa nu; nighamulhamul on. Ibogoy nu to Magboboot ka igtubad no insugu ni Moisis to nighamulhamul kad su ian ka igpohitaga to mgo otow to warad on ka ibung nu.” Pog-udling ni Hisus kandin, pinohipanow rin on.
agubanga
Ka so-up no bulan, ogsamboy a to tanò nu.
Sikan ian no kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Ka batasan to mgo labow no igbuyag no kono no Hudiu no dio to mgo ugpaan to agad hondoi kai to ampow to tano, ogsubla no ogpanugu to mgo sakup dan, dokad di ka goinawa ran to oghingaranan sikandan to mabinulig on woy ogkaaputan to mgo otow.
Oati nu sikan
Woy ogpokouma ka allow to pogboboot ku to mgo otow, ogmarusilom on ka allow, no ka bulan, ogkoiling on to langosa. Sikan ka allow no igkabantug lagboy to mgo otow.
su ogkabantug si Huan dio to tangkaan to Magboboot. Kono og-inum sikandin to agad nokoy no inumanon no ogpakalasing. Ligkat to inkootow rin, duon kabogbogan din su og-ugpo ka Gimukud to Magboboot dio to kandin.”
banoy2
Ogko-unawa ki Ann Joy no moirap ka sakit din. Nigtawaran noy on ka konad on ogkabuì.
walu
Sikan ian to waro a mogtagbu koykow. Agad ko ogkagi ka ro no ogkabawian on ka suguonon ku.
No ka obol to sikan no igtotomog no moomut, nokog-amut on to mgo pog-ampu to mgo sakup to Magboboot no niglindog on ka obol ligkat to sikan no boung no niggongonan to sikan no diwata no nigsasindog to tangkaan to Magboboot.
Nokoy naan, nighondio to balutu si Simon Pedro no nighokad din ka sigay no naponu to mgo dakol no ngalap. Duon songo gatus to ngalap woy kalimmaan woy tatolu. Di agad ko mohon-ing ka nigsagad, waro magisi ka sigay.
uranda
lalow
boluy
Maroyow ka batok to balaus nu su oglo-inlo-in to bulak.
Ian su agad dakol ka ogkabayaan ta no igkabaybayari no ogligkat to nasagboka kinow on ki Hisu Kristu, di ligkat dod kandin, songo dakol ka igbulig to Magboboot to goinawa ta.
lonod
duma
uyamu
Ogpokohun-a si Huan to Lagboy no Igbuyag. No ogkabogayan to Magboboot si Huan to kabogbogan no ian ogkounawa to imbogoy rin ki Elias no sagboka to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan. Ko ogpamminogon to mgo otow ka ignangon ni Huan, ogpokog-uli ka maroyow no goinawa to mgo patalaanak. Lagkos, mohon-ing ka mgo otow no kono ogpaagad-agad to Magboboot, ogpalibongon to pogmatuwarong no ogkounawa to mgo otow no duon goinawa ran dio to Magboboot oyow ka mgo otow, ogpakapanagana ko ogpokouma ka Lagboy no Igbuyag.” kagi to diwata ki Sakarias.
Og-a-alamaraan to ogsulungan ka songo baloy.
“Pitawa now ka mgo uak. Kono man og-orok woy songo kono man oggaani. Waro pinayag dan, di ka Magboboot ka ogsunggud kandan. Nò, ka pulus to lawa now, dakoldakol pad man to pulus to lawa to mgo manukmanuk.”
lokob
Ko ogkalibulung ka mgo sakup to songo igbuyag no ogmabunbunuoy, magaan ogkawaro ka pandatuan dan.
No ian to ogpanumbaloy koy poron kaniu su uromo, ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu, oglibong kai to soini no kalibutan. No ko dio koy to tangkaan din, hontow naan ka og-im-imanan noy woy ko hontow ka igmaroyow to goinawa noy ko kono no sikaniu no nigtuu? No hontow ka ogsayoon noy ko kono no sikaniu?
baluy
Kagi ni Hisus, “Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu to waro pad mootow si Abraham, duon ad on tahan.”
Ogsayoon tanow ka Magboboot su dakol ka ingkohoy-u rin kanta su nasagboka kinow on to Anak din no si Hisus no indakoli rin to goinawa.
Kono man, su ogkagian now buwa sikandin to, ‘Susugba ka pad woy honati a pa to koonon ku. Ko ogpakaponga a ogkoon woy to og-inum koykow ka ogsoip ogkoon.’ ”
Ka otow no tongod to pogtuu rin ogsagmanon din ka songo bato no ogkounawa to soini no bato, songo ogsagmanon a rin.”
bongkag
bakulù
pisang
Ian su kono ogkohimu ko ka langosa to mgo lukosan no baka woy ko kambing, ogpakaawo to salo.
kulugmut
No ko natuman on to mgo otow ka tibo no ingkasulat dongan tongod to pogkamatoy rin, nig–awo dan on ka lawa rin no inlansang dio to krus. Woy insabal dan on dio to sabalan to namatoy.
Magaan oghimatoy sikandan to otow.
bungbung
sira
lunsud
tumalag
duhu
Kagi ni Hisus to sikan no boi to, “Napasaylu on ka mgo salo nu.”
siang
Ka mgo upa no manuk, songo ogpammokak ka ogdalong to lumansad no ogman-ukalò.
salapì
Ian su dio to goinawa ta ogpuun ka maroot no mgo pogdoromdom, no ogkounawa to: ogbunu, woy oghilabot to kono din no asawa woy agad ko wa pad asawa; woy duon dod ka duma no mgo maroot to oghimu no unawa to ogpanakow; woy to og-uubat; woy to ogtalasobon ka duma rin; woy to ogwawangal to agad waro salo to duma rin. Sikan ian ka igmaligsom to otow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.
Ko ogdumoon ka diò to dangob no talabau, ogka-ayat ka.
Nò, nakataliwaro sikandan tibo to gapun. Puun to sikan no gapun nakarinog sikandan to kagi to Magboboot. Kagi rin, “Soini ka anak ku no indakoli ku lagboy to goinawa ku. Pamminog kow kandin.”
Sikan ian to pog-anad ku, og-iling a to sikan no ogpaag-agapoy no kono ogsuwoy di ogparagasdagas on dio to katamanan din. Woy songo og-iling a rod to otow no masunsuntukoy no ogpakasugat to pogsuntuk din.
bogbog
Ka maistra ka og-uli dio to Maniki, no imbul-us pad to mgo bato dio to Patil ka nighatod.
Di sikoykow atag, Timoteo, agad nokoy ka ogkabayaan nu, ponora nu ka mgo batasan nu. Aguantoon nu ro ka mgo igkabaybayari nu. Paragasa nu ka pog-alap-alap nu to Maroyow no Nangnangonon, woy tumana nu ka tibo no igpohimu to Magboboot koykow.
Si Usias amoy ni Hotam. Si Hotam amoy ni Akas. Si Akas amoy ni Isikias.
Nighipanow on si Hisus woy nighondio sikandin to anaranan to mgo og-ampu.
bagkolong
Woy alap kow to mgo kuddo oyow ogpakasakoy si Pablo. No ay–ayari now ka pog–alap now kandin dio ki Gobirnador Pilik oyow kono ogkoomonu.”
No ligkat kandin, nigtuu kinow on to Magboboot no nig-uyag kandin. Woy nigbogayan to Magboboot sikandin to dakol lagboy no ngaran. Sikan ian to ogsaligan ta ka Magboboot woy og-im-imanan ta ka karoyawon no igbogoy rin kanta uromo.
Ka tanud, du-on goinawa ta to ogkadoromdom to duma ta no waro ogkoimuan dan.
Pogkaponga ni Hisus ka tibo no in-anad din to mgo otow, nighondio sikandin to lunsud to Kapirnaum.
pulugpulug
No si Eutiku no ka balubato no noulug, nigduma on to mgo otow to pog–uli dan. No nigmaawang on ka goinawa ran su nouyag on sikandin.
Nataman on soini, nigtalipag woy si Hisus dio to doipag to Lanow to Galilia. Songo oghingaranan ka sikan no lanow to Tibirias.
Tu-ugon ku ka agoloy; agad kumang, litos
Nigsumpalit to mgo sundalu ki Hisus no ogkumusta kandin no kagi ran, “Kumusta ka, Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu.”
Kagi ran to, “Manio to nighondio kad to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no waro nigpatulì, woy nig–amut ka kandan to ogkokoon?”
No ko kono ogkasilaban ka pighimu to songo otow no in-untud din to sikan no unturanan, ogbogayan sikandin to igkasayo.
Ian ku ignangon ka soini su mohon-ing ka mgo otow no kono ogpaagad-agad to sikan no in-anad kandan. Di to mgo otow no oghonduon, mohon-ing pad ka mgo Hudiu no ogkoiling. Waro pulus to ig-anad dan woy ogkoubatan dan ka mgo otow.
ngipon
Di ko oghihipanow ki ko marusilom, ogpakarogpak ki ro su waro igbat-ow ta.”
sili
molog
Si Maria Magdalina woy ka dangob no Maria, nigpinnuu sikandan no nigbantoy to sika sabalanan.
Nò mgo anak, ian ku ignangon kaniu to layun now gogongoni si Hisus oyow ko oglibong sikandin kai to kalibutan, ogmaawang ka goinawa ta no kono ki ogkasipod no ogtangko kandin.
Di kono nu ibogoy su subla to kohop–atan ka mgo otow no ogmanggopas dio to dalan no nangulibot sikandan to woy ran ogkoon woy ko og–inum to agad nokoy ko ogkohimatayan dan on si Pablo. No kuntoon, ian dan do tagaran ko oghoohoo ka to sikan no ogbuyuon dan koykow to ighatod nud si Pablo dio to pogbuyagon to mgo Hudiu. Ian su nig–indanan on to oggopasan dan si Pablo,” kagi to balubato.
manatad
Tibuuson dan on maro-oton dan ka lawa ran. Ian dan umaag ka kandan no hinimuan no maro-ot.
Woy nangoni nu sikandan to oyow ogmohon-ingon dan ka oghimuon dan no maroyow oyow ogkohimu on sikandan no datu to batasan no magaan ogbogoy to otow no ogkaalang-alang to og-awoson dan woy to oyow ogpasublaan dan ka igbogoy ran.
su ka tibo no mgo otow, makasasalo to Magboboot no ka mgo batasan dan, nakamariu to karoyawon din.
Sikan ian, sikaniu no mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy tibo kaniu no mgo pogbuyagon to mgo Hudiu, buyua now dio to igbuyag to mgo sundalu oyow ighutuk din ighatod si Pablo kai to kaniu. No honduonan now to ian now igpohondini su og–ay–ayaron now to og–insoinso kandin tongod to pighimu rin. Dokad di, nig–indan koy to, woy ogpokouma si Pablo kai to kaniu, oghimatayan noy on.”
Ka asu, ogko-iniat no ogbobo-ul to abu su ogko-inniat to du-on pad mo-init to abu.
sawalì
bayad
buyag
Ko ogduruldulugan ta ka duma ta, kanta ka ogdani kandin.
Ko ogpananap ka batò, ilud dod.
Piggongonan dan woy pigganoy ran sikandin dio to libuwasan to lunsud to Hirusalim, woy pinandogpak dan on sikandin to dakol no batu oyow ogkamatoy. No ka mgo talagmalogot, impanwakdas ka kinabo dan no dio dan isabuk to paa to songo balubato. Ka ngaran din, si Saulo.
bangkalow
mumol
Ian su kagi to mgo Sadusiu to waro pogkouyag to mgo nammatoy, waro diwata woy songo waro gimukud. Di ka mgo Parisiu, ogtuu atag to sikan tibo.
Ka kabogbogan woy ka pogtuu noy to ngaran ni Hisus, ian ka immanokal to soini no no otow no ogkitoon now woy tahan now no natagaan no napulid. No noulian on ian sikandan kai to taliwaro now su nigligkat ki Hisus ka sikan no pogtuu noy.
Ko du-on otow no og-insò ko kon-u pad nakasal. Ogtabak to  Gabi-i pad nokogtu-un.
Ko ogtotomog ka to hapuy no oghiupan nu, ogko-obolan ka mata nu no ogmaporos on
Ko si Moisis dongan, suguanon do to Magboboot no masalig sikandin to tibo no pog-alap din dio to mgo otow no impasakup to Magboboot. Di ka sikan no nohimu ni Moisis, immaganangon to sikan no igpatuman to Magboboot uromo.
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Magaan ka, Usi, ko nokoy ka oghimuon nu.” Nò, nigdakop to mgo otow si Hisus. Nigdosonan dan sikandin to poggongon.
limu
Nò, nokouma on ka mohuri no marusilom ni Pedro dio to pirisuan. No pogkapawo, igpaangoy on ni Hirodis sikandin. Si Pedro, nighikotan to karina ka mgo bolad din no inggawid to daruwa no sundalu. Duon do ian nokohirogo sikandin. Woy duon mgo sundalu dio to tangkaan to pirisuan no nigbabantoy.
diù
Ogmagù, ogmagu-on ku tagtu-un.
Songo allow to nig-anad si Hisus to mgo otow, duon dod ka mgo Parisiu woy ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod. Nigpuun sikandan dio to agad hondoi no lunsud dut Probinsia to Galilia woy ka Probinsia to Hudia woy ka lunsud to Hirusalim, no dio naminpinnuu ka tibo. No si Hisus, nigbogayan on to Magboboot to kabogbogan su oyow ogpakabawi to mgo otow no nigdaralu.
No ka sikan no ogpakamaroyow kanta dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, ogligkat atag to pogtuu ta ki Hisu Kristu. No agad hontow no ogtuu on kandin, songo ogkohimu on no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot su waro ogpakalabow no otow,
kamoy
Kagi ni Hisus no nigtabak kandan to, “Og-inso a kaniu ko wa kow makabasa to kagi to Magboboot no ingkasulat dongan tongod ki Dabid no ian igbuyag ta dongan? Si Dabid woy ka mgo sakup din,
Ko nig-a-ambutut a, warò nigdakot ka pa-a ku to simitu.
puwas
Ko ogtilu-on ka kandiru, ogkukulkul ki to sanig to homoy.
Kunto-on si-ak no oghipanow ad
Ungod kinow ro ogkarago.
sasablokon no biaw
Nò, nighimu to mgo otow dio ka pagkoonan ki Hisus woy songo nig-amut si Lasaru. Si Marta ka talaghonat.
Du-on baloy no maroyow ka batok din.
sablok
Nò, ka sikan no ogpinpinnuu dio to sagapun, songo pogbolobos din to sikan no likung din no nagaani on ka to tibo to soini no kalibutan.
nikaniu
Mgo sulod, kono kid ogkabolongbolong ko ogkoumaan ki to mohirap no igkabaybayari ta no ig-ol-olog to pogtuu ta. Tahan do man ian no ogkoumaan ki to mgo igkabaybayari ta.
gasap
boklas
Nigbabansagon sikandan no nig-inso sikandan ki Hisus to, “Koykow no Anak to Magboboot, nokoy ka tuud nu kanami? Oglogparan koy nikoykow agad ko waro pad nokouma ka allow no iglogpad?”
Ogpaki-anak ki.
Sikan ian, ongkoran tad on ka mgo doromdom ta no ogligkat to tahan no pogkootow ta su sikan ka ligkatan to ogtumanon ta ka mgo tahan no batasan ta no maroot. Ian su sikan ka ogpakagawoy woy ogpakaraat lagboy kanta.
Nigtinagpa-an on to miow to nigdawi ka amagal to songo nigdawi to bakokang.
Nalimuan koy to pogpitow to sundalu su naan dan no sikanami ka ogpammitawan dan no nakasabuk to pirisuan.
Ka mohon-ing on nig-ol-olog ka busow to oghimatoy porom ko nig-usung din dio to hapuy ko rio to woig. Ko ogpakabulig ka, kohoy-ui koy, Buyag, pangabangi koy.”
oli
Nò, ka igkapapitu no diwata to Magboboot, nighiup to bungag din. Inogo on no duon maagbot no mgo lagong ligkat dio to langit no nigkagi to, “Ligkat kuntoon taman to waro katamanan, waro loin no ogpakaalap to pandatuan to soini no kalibutan ko kono no ka Lagboy no Igbuyag woy ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan no pigsugu din no si Kristu.”
Pangunduli’n su’ggutasan kid.
Ian su ko dio koy rod to kaniu, impanoy noy inangon kaniu to duon ogkabayaan ta no igkabaybayari. Woy nataga kow to sikan su natuman on.
bogbog
Pamminog kow su agad ka asolom do, waro ta matagoi ko nokoy ka ogkabayaan ta. Malopot do so pog-ugpo ta kai to soini no kalibutan. No ian ogkounawaan ka salagapun no ogkitoon ta to dagdagow ro di mangkuwan warad on.
tibò
Duon dod kagi rin to, “Sikan no otow no duon pogsabut din to kamalogotan, ogtimulan ka pogsabut din. Di atag, sika otow waro pogsabut to kamalogotan, ogsalinan pad ka sikan no molintok no duon to ulu rin.”
Nigtabak si Hisus to igbuyag to anaranan to mgo Hudiu. Kagi rin, “Ogpatuutuu ro ka pogtuu now! Hontow pad no otow dii ka kono din oghokaron ka lubid to baka rin woy ko kuddo din no ogtuyukon din dio to woig oyow ogpoinumon din to Allow ta to Oghimoloy?
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus, “Di atag, ognangonan ku sikaniu to nokouma on si Ilias no nigbaybayaran dan sikandin to agad nokoy no naromdoman dan no unawa ian to inkasulat to Tahan no Kasulatan ta.”
No kuntoon, ogkoiniatan din to oyow, ka agad hontow no mabogbog no og-ugpo dio to agad hondoi to Langit, tibo ogkataga to ogkatou lagboy ka Magboboot to agad nokoy no oghimuon din. No ian to ogkataga sikandan su ogligkat to mgo otow no nigtuu on ki Hisus.
Ka pusù to agoloy no waro nigtomu to ngipon din, sikan ka kabus no agoloy.
Sabuk nud
bilog
No ka mgo otow dio to solod to baloy, tibo naninsinogow woy nigpandawot. Di kagi ni Hisus, “Kono kow ogmaninsinogow. Waro mamatoy sikandin; nokoirogo do tigbal.”
Goinawa rin ian to og-aguantoon din ka igmasakit to goinawa rin su ka pog-iman-iman din to sikan no Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan no si Kristu. Hondoi ka dakoldakol no pulus ni Moisis ko kono no ka sikan no pog-aguanta din? Kono no ian din pad pulus ka dakol no igkaratui dio to Ehipto su nigdoromdom din ka sikan no igkasayo kandin uromo.
Ka sikan no nohimu ran, ogpanag-ilingan to soini no kuntoon on kanta su ligkat to nighimu ni Hisus. Ian su, ka mgo igbogoy to mgo otow dio to Magboboot woy ka mgo ayam no oghimatayan dan no igtubad, kono ogpakaayun to goinawa to mgo ogsimba dio to kandin.
Sikan ian to mohon–ing kandan ka nigtuu on ki Hisus, woy mohon–ing ka mabantug no mgo boi woy mgo lukos no Girigu no songo nigtuu on.
mabulut
Og-alikon oyow ogkalilid on.
Lunis ka.
Ko ogpangu-ig, oglo-uy koy to mgo turukanan.
anoy
langab
salopung
batasan
Ian su, ian to ogkoumaan ki to igkabolu to Magboboot su waro ki nakatood no ogpaagad-agad to tibo to sikan no Balaod. Di pananglitan, ko waro pa ka sikan no Balaod, kono ogkohimu no ogkalop-angan ta.
himalò
taman to ogdoogon ku ka mgo usig nu oyow ogpakaluhud on sikandan dini to tangkaan nu.’ ”
No manio to waro dan makatood? Hoo su ian dan ogsaligan ka kandan no mgo hinimuan no waro nigtuu sikandan ki Hisu Kristu. Sikan ian, nounawa sikandan to mgo otow no nakarogpak to dakol no batu no dio to dalan dan.
Di og-awoson ta atag to ogkoibogan ta lagboy ka kinagian to Magboboot no waro solug no maroot oyow ogkohogot on ka pogtuu ta taman to ogkapongaan on ka pogpangabang din kanta. No ian tad ogkounawaan ka mgo bato no ogsusu pad no ogmalogod to gatas to inoy ran oyow songo ogtulin.
sabungsabung
Ka poghulup to patiukan, songo simana rò ka pog-ugpò dan no oglokas on ka oghalin.
opos
Ka otow no alukuy rin nigsalin to tatolu no gatus no pisus. Ka salapi no nakaratong, darua no gatus dò.
Nabongkag on to inayon ka anakon din no iam pad na-asawa su nigtambag dò to ogpo-ongkoran din on ka asawa rin.
li-ot
obol
uyag
Duon ka sikan no mgo otow no nighun-a ki Hisus woy duon dod mohuri no ogpakasundul kandin no tibo, nigbunsud no ogbabansagon to “Ogsayoon ta ka Magboboot. Ogkapulusan ta ka soin no otow no oghondini to ngaran to Magboboot.”
Ian su ungod a ogdumaruma koykow. No agad hontow, kono ogpakatood to oghisakit koykow su mohon–ing pad ka mgo otow no ogtuu kanak kai to soini no lunsud to Kurintu,” kagi ni Hisus.
Sikan ian to og-awoson to ogpatorongon ka mgo boi to ulu ran su oyow agad ka mgo diwata to Magboboot, songo ogkitoon to ogkasugu ka boi to asawa rin.
Waro nokoholos dio ki Pilatu to ian ligkatan to inbayung to mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu ki Hisus ka pogkoima ran kandin.
Ko du-on taga Maguimon no ogligkat to Patil di nig-ulì on sikandan, no du-on nasinundul no og-ulì diò to Maambago, kagi sikandin to, “Ogka-agapan ka Usì.” Ogtabak ka taga Maguimon to, “Balagad. Hun-a ka rò du-on.”
logpad
Ko du-on otow no ian nakasalò, no nigbayungan din ka songo otow su igpa-abin din ka nigtakow rin no salapì.
Waro dan doromdoma ka sikan no nig-ongkoran dan no ugpaan. Di ko nigdoromdom dan pa, ogpokouli porom sikandan ko ian ka ogkoiniatan dan.
Tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus dio to lunsud to Listra woy ka dio to Ikuniu, ognangon ki Pablo to maroyow ian no otow si Timoteo.
bantoy
abolong
sangì
tingkob
Ian to oghingaranan ka sikan no kayu to dayuan su moon-ing ka mgo manukmanuk no ogdayu ka mandapù to mgo bogas to balitì.
Kono kow oghidhirogo su ogkatokawan kow buwa to pog-uli din.
Ka logdak no manggad no manipis, ogmo-ilag ka pogpitow ta.
po-uk
saag
alang
kobot
Pogkaponga to nig–alukuy pad ni Pistu ka mgo talagtambag kandin, nigtabak sikandin ki Pablo to, “Su ogkoiniat ka to ogsalig ki Igbuyag Sisar, no sikan ian ka ogpohondioon kud on sikoykow dio to kandin,” kagi ni Pistu.
Nigsagdok si Hisus no nigsugu to igpaalap dan ka nabutud dio to kandin. Pogmarani on to nabutud, kagi ni Hisus kandin to, “Nokoy buwa ka ogkoiniatan nu poron dii to koddi?”
Nò, to sikan no mohon-ing no poghipanow ku, nohirapan ad ian lagboy su duon nabaybayaan ku to mgo woig no ogpanlanog, woy songo nakabayo a to mgo otow no takawon. Woy duon allow no nig-ogotan a to mgo karumaan ku no Hudiu. No to dangob no allow, nig-ogotan a to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. Agad hondoi a makabayo, ko dio a to dakol no lunsud woy ko dio to holholawan, woy ko dio a to dagat, malasi a ogkoumoi to igkamatoy ku porom. Woy songo duon igkohirapi ku no nigligkat to mgo otow no og-uubat no nahan dan no sulod ta to pogtuu.
langosa
sulud to ubal
bodbod
dungkù
“Di sikaniu atag, nokoy ka kaniu no ogtabak? Hontow a to kaniu no goinawa?” Nigtabak ni Pedro to, “Sikoykow ian ka Kristu.”
sasow
Pananglitan, ko tahan no nouripon ka no naabin kad on ni Hisus, balagad. Di ko ogbogayan kad to oyow ogpakaawo ka to nokouyamu koykow, maroyow ko og-awo kad on ian
Nò, ka dakol woy mabantug no lunsud to Babilunia, nagulak on no nabaad on to tatolu no baad. No ka mgo dakol no lunsud to tibo no mgo ugpaan, songo nagulak on. Malogot ian to waro malingawi to Magboboot ka mgo salo to mgo otow no nig-ugpo dio to sikan no mabogbog no lunsud to Babilunia. Omunaan to impoinum din sikandan to inumanon duon to boung din no ian ka igdagsang din to sikan no lagboy no igkabolu din.
Di ogbuyu a ro koykow to oyow ogmaawanga nu ro bag ka goinawa nu ki Onisimu. Sikandin, ogkounawa to anak ku su ko kai a napirisu, nohimu ad on no amoy rin no nigtuu on sikandin ki Hisus.
kulus
Ian su ka mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, ogkohimu ran to ogkagongonan dan ka kandan no ogkagion oyow woy ogkagi ko oghagtong on ka dangob no ogkagi.
Uromo to allow to ogbobootan to Magboboot ka mgo otow, songo ogsunditan kow to dongan no Labow no Igbuyag no boi dio to lunsud no oghingaranan to Siba, su nigpuun sikandin to mariu lagboy no lunsud oyow oghondio do no ogpaminog to ig-anad to Labow no Igbuyag no si Solomon. No, kuntoon duon otow no og-anad kaniu no labow pad lagboy ki Igbuyag Solomon di waro now tuui ka ig-anad din kaniu.”
Ian to dio koy mogdatong to Militu su pigtuud ni Pablo to ogligaran do ka lunsud to Episu su waro din noiniati to ogkalugoy dio to probinsia to Asia. Naragusu su ko ogkohimu, ogkoiniat no ogpokouma dio to lunsud to Hirusalim litos to og–amut to allow to pagkoonan to mgo Hudiu no oghingaranan to Pintikustis.
ngoyngoy
laklakalan
lampos
Duon mgo otow no ogkoiniatan dan to ogdakopon dan porom si Hisus. Di waro makatood to ogdakop kandin.
Ko nigkita si Hisus to ogsisinogow si Maria mgo Hudiu no nigluyud kandin, lagboy no masakit ka kandin no goinawa.
Ka oghimuon ku, ogpakatuman to ingkasulat no kinagian to Magboboot to: “Ka mgo otow no waro pad nanangoni tongod kandin, ogkatagaan on ko hontow sikandin. No ka mgo otow no waro makarinog tongod kandin, ogpakasabut on.”
Ko ogsilsilon ka ngipon, ogmo-omul no ogkabarut.
bontung
no
Ko malibuson di nigdo-isok, nigkilos.
katupis
Pakapantow ka talipid, du-on mangayow.
tagam
botak
iam
tapid
Ka asu, ko og-ul-ul to bokog, oglalakobkob on.
Wa do nigbuloy no nigbobootan ad to Gimukud to Magboboot woy naalap ka gimukud ku dio to langit. No nigkita ku ka pinnuuanan no ogpinpinnu-an to Lagboy no Igbuyag ko ogboboot, woy nigkita a to sikan no nigpinpinnuu to sikan.
Nigtakarog si Hisus duon to malopot no bubungan woy nig-umow rin ka mgo lukos ko hontow no ogkoiniatan din no og-alamon din no nigdalapak sikandan ki Hisus.
Pogpamikatpikat, nig-onow si Hisus no nighipanow dio to waro otow no dio nig-ampu.
ligu
palot
hoy-u
lingawan
“Ko sikan ka oghimuon dan koddi no waro salo, nokoy buwa uromo ka ogkoumaan to mgo otow no makasasalo?”
Songo boi din; songo boi a.
siman
Sikan ian no nigpallaguy si Sakiu diad to kohun-aan to mgo otow no namanoik on to kayu no oghingaranan to sikumoru su oyow ogkaayun no ogpitow ki Hisus su dio ian ogpakabayo si Hisus ko ogligad.
digus
Ko duon otow, agad hontow, no og-anad to dangob no tinuuan no kono og-uyun to tu-tuu ian no kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu woy ka ig-anad ta tongod to ogmonuon ta oyow ogtumanan ta ka koiniatan to Magboboot,
Sikan ka kagi ni Isaias tongod ki Hisus su nakitaan din ka karayawi ni Hisus no nigkagi bahin kandin.”
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to pananglitan nigkagi to, “Ka kayu no waro dalu din, ogbogas to maroyow. Di ka kayu no duon dalu ogbogas to maroot. Ogkatagaan ta ko maroyow woy ko maroot ka kayu pinabayo to bogas din.
Sikan ian no nasabutan to mgo hibatoon din to si Huan no Talagbautismu to mgo otow ka innangon din.
Agad dio to kandin no ugpaan waro sikandin tinawaa.
Ka otow no nahan din no maawang ka nig-ugpaan din dokad di waro goinawa rin to duma rin, dio dod ogpokougpo to marusilom.
Nò, inlansang dan on si Hisus dio to krus woy niglindog dan. Naponga sikan, nighantak sikandan ko hontow ka ogpakaabin to mgo kinabo ni Hisus.
liu
No nigpasagdok on to taga Itiopia ka sakayan no nanlogsad on ka daruwa. Nanopak sikandan duon to woig no nigbautismuan ni Pilipi ka taga Etiopia.
Ko ogtumanon ta ka sikan, kono kid on ogkounawa to mgo bato no ogkahalinhalin ka goinawa ran. Di ogkasagboka ro ka goinawa ta. No kono kid on ogmagaan ogkaalap to agad nokoy no tinuuan no kono no tu-tuu no ig-anad to mgo otow no magawoygawoy to og-uubat to mgo otow.
naan
lukò
No ka ignangon ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “kono kow ian ogpakalibuwas ko waro now pad ian matiboi bayari ka tibo no utang now, agad sagboka naan do no sintabus,” kagi ni Hisus.
Soini man do ka dangob no pananglitan ni Hisus to mgo otow no nahan dan no matul-id ka kandan no batasan di ka duma no mgo otow, pigsawoy ran.
sunguan
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin, “Ighalit ku pad soin no paan to sabow. Sikan no otow no ogbogayan ku, sikandin ian.” Nò, nigpurut din ka songo pisang no paan, inhalit din on, woy pigbogayan din si Hudas no anak ni Simon Iskariot.
Ian su nigtuu on ian si Abraham to ogkatou ka Magboboot to ogtuman to sikan no innangon din.
Ko nanhipanow on ka mgo otow no si Hisus naan do, mgo sampulu woy darua no hibatoon din woy duma no sakup din do duon, nig-inso to mgo sakup si Hisus to lituk to pananglitan din.
Ka duma no mgo otow, ogkounawa sikandan to boni no nakasawod to nabatuon no tano no magaan ogtuu to nangnangonon woy ogkarago on.
To diad on sikandin, nokouma ka mgo otow no niglolong sikandan to lukos no nighibat to hibatanan din su nigkolog ka lawa rin. Si Hisus ka tuud dan. Pogsabut ni Hisus to dakol ka pogtuu ran kandin nigkagian din ka otow no nigkolog ka lawa rin to, “Sulod, maroyawa nu ka goinawa nu su nigpasaylu kud on ka mgo salo nu.”
woig
Bali naan no nakaroromdom ka sikan no balubato to amoy rin. Kagi to goinawa rin, ‘Mohon-ing ka mgo suguonon dio to amoy ku no dakol ka koonon dan woy duon dod ogkasamo, di koddi atag kai, ogkamatoy ad to gutas.
ima
Kagi ni Hisus, “Papinnuua now ka mgo otow.” Nò, naminnuu on ka mgo otow dio to toolan su maluag ka toolan dio. Duon inat marani to lalimma no libu no mgo lukos.
Ogko-iling to ighusung di mohimulung dò.
no-omno-om
Nigpaagbotan man do ni Pedro to pogligal din no kagi rin, “Kona a ogtokod to sikan no otow.”
Sikan ian ka igkabolu ni Hirodias ki Huan no ogpohimatayan din porom. Di kono ogbogoy si Hirodis to ogpohimatayan.
Pogkaponga on to impapitow to Magboboot ki Pablo no nig–agpas koy nigpanagana to oghipanow no oghondio to Masidonia. Ian su nasabutan noy to ian lituk to sikan to pigsugu koy to Magboboot oyow ogkanangonan noy on ka taga Masidonia to sikan no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus.
Hoo, Amo, nighimu nud soini su sikan ian ka ogkoiniatan nu woy sikan no imboot nud no maroyow nu.”
Di nigtabak si Hisus kandin to pananglitan. Kagi rin to, “Songo allow duon ka otow no nighimu to dakol no pagkoonan no mohon-ing ka nigtugunan din oyow ogpakoonon din.”
No sikan ian to nighokad dan do ka lubid no inhikot dan to mgo palibatu no nig–ongkoran dan do duon to woig. Nokogdongan do to nighokad dan on ka lubid no inhikot to mgo timun no igdalan to barku. Pogkaponga, pigbolat dan ka dakol no manggad to tangkaan to barku oyow ogpakarusu on to kalamag no ogduung on ogparagas dio to pantad.
Papagba ka to apug
limmow
Nò, nigbalagad pad to Magboboot ka sikan no magintalunan ko nokoy ka ogkagion din no igparakoldakol woy ka igpandoot to Magboboot. No taman to kohop-atan woy daruwa no bulan, nigbogayan to Magboboot sikandin to liwak to og-alap-alap pad to katondanan.
Kagi ni Hisus kandin, “Igi, koddi ka ogligkatan to igkootawi to mgo namatoy. Woy koddi ka ogligkatan to kouyagan no waro katamanan. Sika otow no ogtuu koddi, agad ogkamatoy ka lawa rin, ogkootawan do dio to Magboboot.
Mgo sulod no indakoli ku to goinawa, ka soini no igsulat ku kaniu, kono no kuntoon pad no sugu. Ian su tahan do no kinagian to Magboboot no nigdinog now ligkat to kabinunsuran to pogtuu now.
lotoy
songo tu-id on
Woy songo ogdinogon ku to kono kow ogkahallok to mgo usig now. No ligkat to sikan, ka mgo usig now, ogkoindanan naan to sikandan ka ogkalogparan to Magboboot to waro katamanan, di songo ogkatagaan dan to sikaniu ka ogkabogayan to kouyagan no waro katamanan su ka Magboboot ka ogpasabut kandan to sikan.
dii
Kaniu no mgo uripon, ay-ayari now to ogpaagad-agad to tagtuun kaniu kai to tano. No ilagkos now ka dakol no pogtahud now kandan woy og-awoson to kono oglimanglimang ka goinawa now to pogtalabau now kandan. No og-awoson to ogdoromdomon now ka sikan no oghimuon now kandan to songo ighimu now rod ki Kristu.
bunggù
muog
Pogkaponga ni Hisus to sikan no innangon din kandan, nabatun on sikandin dio to Langit no nigbantoy ka mgo suguanon din taman to naatangan on to salagapun.
Agad boi to lukos, ka asawa to mgo patalahari ran, oghingaranan to mgo patala-iras.
tungow
Ian su sikaniu no mgo lukos, og-awoson no ogkataga kow to matuwarong no batasan to pogpangasawa to boi no kono ogligkat to oghimu kow to maroot,
Tigbal dò no ogkagi.
Pogkouma on woy ni Pablo dio to Ikuniu no nigsolod on to anaranan to mgo Hudiu. No su nalituk lagboy ka innangonnangon dan tongod ki Hisus, mohon–ing ka mgo Hudiu woy ka kono no Hudiu no nigtuu kandin.
antagbot
Sikan ian, ko maroot ka mgo batasan ta, ian ogkounawaan to oghipanow ki rod to karusiloman, no kono no tu-tuu ko ignangon ta to duma ta to, “Maroyow ka pogdumaruma ku to Magboboot,” su ubat do duon ka ogkagion ta, no ka mgo batasan ta, waro mokounug to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon.
pandog
Nò, to sikan no igkaruwa no inhondio ku to kaniu, nigbohog ku ka sikan no mgo makasasalo woy lagkos to tibo no duma no mgo otow. No kuntoon to waro a pad mokouma, oghutukon ku pad ogbohogon sikandan to, ko waro pad mabalbalawi ka sikan no mgo batasan dan, waro agad sagboka kandan no makasasalo no kono ogkalogparan.
Dakol so-ini.
Kasul-ugan to woig ka balutu.
Di nigkamoy ni Pedro to oyow oghagtong on ka mgo otow to ogkakagi. Woy innangonnangon din kandan ka pighimu to Magboboot no impalibuwas kandin to pirisuan. Kagi ni Pedro, “Inangon now ka soini dio ki Santiago woy to mgo sulod ta to pogtuu ki Hisus.” Pogkaponga, nighipanow on si Pedro no nighondio to songo ugpaan.
Ka tano ka ogpuunan to pogtulin to boni woy to pogbogas. Ka sikan no boni, ogpandagom, ogkaboros, woy ogbogas.
Woy songo ogpangumustoon ka ni Markos, woy ni Aristarku, woy ni Dimas, woy ni Lukas. Mgo duma ku sikandan to ognangonnangon to mgo otow tongod ki Hisus.
dagkot
Nakako-on a to sikan no agkud di warò a mataga ko ogmonuon to poghimu.
Ko oghipanow on ka abogaru no si Sinas woy si Apulus, buligi nu sikandan oyow waro ogkaawos dan ko diad on to dalan.
hagamhagam
Manio to sikoddi ka og-insaan now? Ian now insoi ka mgo otow no nakarinog koddi su sikandan ka nataga on to in-anad ku.”
Napukan on ka kayu su nalopuk on.
kulut
No nanangnangonan on ka mgo otow to nigbogayan on to Magboboot si Hisus no taga Nasarit to Gimukud din, woy to dakol no kabogbogan. No agad hondoi nigdolog sikandin, nigbuligan din ka mgo otow. Woy nigbulung din on ka tibo no pigbaybayaran to busow su nigdumaruma ka Magboboot kandin.
kiambù
antuliow
Ka lanow no napongong, konò ogpakalibuas.
Di ogsulatan ta sikandan to oyow kono og–amut to mgo pagkoonan no duon igtubad to mgo inotow-otow, woy kono dan oghilaboti ka kono no asawa ran, woy to oyow kono ogkoon to mgo langosa.
Di si Gobirnador Pilik, dakol ka natagaan din tongod to sikan no tinuuan ki Hisus no oghingaranan to Dalan. Sikan ian to nigpahagtong din pad ka ig–insoinso dan ki Pablo to kagi rin to, “Woy ku ro ogbobooti sikoykow ko oghongkai pad si Lisias no ian igbuyag to mgo sundalu no dio to Hirusalim.”
Nò, ka soini no igkarago no innangon ni Dabid, kono no ka mgo Hudiu ro no ogpatuli ka ogkabogayan to sikan no igkarago su agad hondoi no otow lagkos to kono no Hudiu no kono ogpatuli, songo ogkabogayan. Ian su ka innangon noy kaniu, nigtuu si Abraham to innangon to Magboboot no sikan ian ka nighingaranan on to Magboboot sikandin to maroyow dio to tangkaan din.
Nò, ka mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu, ko nigdinog on to soin no kagi, waro nig-uunawa ka sumsumanan dan.
Sikan ian ka nighondio ka mgo pogbuyagon dio to pirisuan no nig–uras kandan woy nighinggat kandan dio to libuwasan. Nangamuyu sikandan woy ki Pablo to oyow og–awo on to sikan no lunsud.
Dakol so goinawa ni Donghuan su nahan din no ogko-onon ad bua to so-i dakol no bakosan.
No nighipanow on ka soin no nabawian no nignangonan din on ka mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu to, “Si Hisus ian ka nigbawi koddi.”
Maga-an ogkasundug ka goinawa.
Ko nigsupsup on ni Hisus ka mangilu no bino, nigkagi rin to, “Natuman on ka tibo.” No, nig-unduk woy inlibuwas din ka gimukud din.
sugisugi
Sikan ian no nigtangkap on ka kinagian to Magboboot no nigmohon–ing on ian ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to Hirusalim. Woy mohon–ing no mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu no songo nigtuu on ki Hisus.
No ka otow no ogkoiling to sikan no oglimanglimang so goinawa rin, songo kono ogkasaligan no og-awoson to songo kono og-iman-iman sikandin to ogkabogayan to agad nokoy no ogligkat to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
so-up
Ka boi no ogkoirapan ka og-anak, og-obu-an ka gotok oyow igpalibbuas ka batò.
bato-bato-i
‘Nangoni ka mgo otow dio no matig Hirusalim to ogdatong ka Labow no Igbuyag dan kuntoon. Matuwarong sikandin no og-untud sikandin to nati to asno.’
Nignangon si Hisus to, “Oglibong a to kono no kalugoy. No og-alap a to igbogoy ku no igsayo to tag sagboka no otow ko nokoy ka nighimu rin.
Ko ogpokouma ka allow to igkootawi ku to kamatayon ku, ogkataga kow on to salupung a to Amoy ku. Woy ogkataga kow to songo unawa ka nasalupung kinow ro.
La-in ka nonom
hagsil
lambing
pingow
Malambog no pungu
hoy-u
ogpo-ol-olinoy ka ogpohulhuliroy
Ka nig-alap ku ka anak ku diò to dibabò, woy on obu-i to duktul ko a las siis on to masolom.
To napongan dan to niglabung, pigpurut ni Hisus ka basu to inumanon dan no kagi ni Hisus, “Ka soini no igpoinum ku kaniu, sikan ka igmaganangon kaniu to duon iam no kasabutan to Magboboot kaniu su ka soini no langosa ku no ogkoitis kaniu, ian ka ighogot to kasabutan din kaniu.
Ka otow no manonob, og-opuk ka ogsonob to woig no ogpamanghò to to ngalap.
sugoy
sinug-ung
Nigsimba to mgo otow ka ulod no oghingaranan to daragun su ian ka nigbogoy to katondanan din dio to sikan no magintalunan. Woy songo pigsimba dan ka magintalunan. No kagi ran to, “Waro agad hontow no ogpakalabowlabow to kabogbogan to soini no magintalunan. Woy waro agad hontow no ogpakaatu kandin.”
Inkagi kud on kaniu no nakakita kow on koddi di waro kow man ian mogsalig.
sanok
tuwal
Bali naan no songo nigpapitow kanak. No ka pogtuu ku, ian nounawaan ka bato no mananoy niglosut.
Di, pogwatilok ni Pablo to ulod no noulug on dio to hapuy no waro noomonu si Pablo.
panangnangonoy
Ka otow no ogko-iniat to moon-ing no boi, sikan ka aligon.
Kanak no si Huan, ogsulatan ku ka mgo otow no nigtuu to Magboboot no dio to sikan no papitu no mgo lunsud dio to probinsia to Asia. Ogbuyu a to Magboboot oyow ogkohoy-uan kow rin woy to oyow ogkabogayan kow to maawang no goinawa no ogligkat kandin woy to Gimukud din woy ki Hisu Kristu. Agad dongan, woy kuntoon taman to waro katamanan, sikandin do ian ka Magboboot. No ka Gimukud din no ungod og-ugpo dio to tangkaan din, papitu ka igpohitaga to kabogbogan din. Si Hisu Kristu, ian ka ogkasaligan ta to ogmalogot to ignangonnangon din. No sikandin ka an-anayan no ligkat to kamatayon no nouyag on to waro katamanan. Woy sikandin dod ka ogpakaboot to tibo no mgo labow no datu no kai to soini no tano. Dakol ka goinawa rin kanta su niglipuwasan ki nikandin to mgo salo tanow su ligkat to pogkamatoy rin dio to krus.
kobut
Na-anad on
Nigdani si Hisus no nigsasindog dio to longod to anugang ni Simon no pigdogil on ni Hisus ka moinit dut lawa rin woy piglibuanan on do no nabolow on ka lawa rin no nig-onow nigparagas nigsasindog on ka boi no sikandin ka nighon-at to koonon woy ki Hisus.
Ian su ka igbayad to salo to mgo otow, ka kamatayon to waro katamanan. Di ka igbogoy to Magboboot no waro bayad, ian ka kouyagan no waro katamanan no ogligkat to ogkasagboka kinow ki Hisu Kristu.
Pogkouma rin dio to lunsud to Sisaria, nighondio pad to lunsud to Hirusalim no ogpangumustaan din pad ka mgo otow dio no nigtuu ki Hisus. Pogkaponga, nighipanow on no nighondio to lunsud to Antiokia.
patù
libod
utok
Agad to du-on mgo koirapi to mgo pog-ugpò ta, di igsalig ta rò to Magbobo-ot.
soysoy
Nò, to soini no ingkasulat dongan, duon ingkoholos no lituk no igpohitaga on to Magboboot kanta. No to pogkasabuti ku, ian din ogpanag-ilingan si Kristu woy ka mgo otow no ogpasakup kandin.
Diò ki ogdahag to songo bubungan su moon-ing ka babuy no natagaan ku.
Pila kun allow?
Mgo anak, ogsulatan ku sikaniu su nigpasaylu kow on to mgo salo now su ligkat to nighimu ni Hisus.
li-og
sapad
Ogtago-oron ku to logdak ka logdak now.
lapdap
Nò, nouli on ka mgo hibatoon din.
Nò, to niggoram to mgo igbuyag to mgo sundalu woy to mgo sakup din no nigtamong ki Hisus ka pogdinug woy to nigkita ran ka tibo no nohimu, nahallok lagboy sikandan no nignangon to, “Malogot naan ian no sikandin ka Anak to Magboboot.”
Ian su duon ingkasulat to Balaod dongan to, “Kono now ogkinawowi ka mgo bo-bo to baka no ogpapandiokan now ka nagaani now.” Di og-inso a ko mgo baka ro ka nigdoromdom to Magboboot ko impasulat din ka soini no Balaod
taya
sugat
No ogsulungon dan si Hisus no ian oghingaranan to Nati no Karniru. Di sikandin, lagkos to mgo nigtuu no ian ka nig-alam din woy masalig to ogtuman to kinagian din, ogpakaroog to sikan no mgo igbuyag, su sikandin ka Igbuyag no ogpakalabow to tibo no mgo igbuyag woy sikandin ka Datu no ogpakalabow to tibo no mgo datu.
[Ko og-ilud], ogko-onsig ka batò.
kodkod
pu-un
Tibo no mgo otow, nakakoon taman to nalantoy on. Pigpurut dan on ka nasamo naponu ka sampulu no bukag woy darua to mgo lotibon to paan woy ngalap to woig.
Di ka mgo otow no oghimu to ogpakasipod, woy ka oghimu to mgo mamulingan, woy ka ogbunu, woy ka ogsimba to mgo inotow-otow, woy ka oghimu to maroot to kono no asawa ran, woy ka tibo no mgo ubaton, woy ka oggawi to duma ran, kono ogpakasolod dio to sikan no dakol no lunsud to Magboboot.
Di ka maroot no mgo kagi no dio oglibuwas to bo-bo to otow no dio nigpuun to maligsom no goinawa rin, ian ka ogpakaligsom to otow oyow kono ogpakatangko to Magboboot.
waro a nighagtonghagtong to ogpasalamat to Magboboot tongod kaniu. No ko og-ampu a kandin, og-ampuan ku sikaniu.
onsig
Matag allow.
kinurus
Ian su ka tibo no Balaod, ogpakalagkos to soini no sagboka ro no sugu to Magboboot no nigkagi to, “Dakola now ka goinawa now to mgo duma now un-unowoi karakol to kaniu lagboy no lawa.”
Ma-agkap ka kabil ku.
Ka sikan no mgo otow, nanhondio ki Hisus oyow ogpamminog to nangnangonon din woy to oyow ogkabawian ka mgo dalu ran. Ka mgo otow no nigsoloran to mgo busow, songo mabawian on su nigdogil ni Hisus ka mgo busow to lawa ran.
Kagi ni Hirodis, “Nigpatamporan kud on man ka liog ni Huan, no hontow naan buwa ka sikan no otow no narinogan ku?” No natimulan do ka tuud din to ogkikita poron ki Hisus.
timun
banggat
tabirak
Nò, nig-uran to dakol woy niglanog ka woig woy songo nigkalamag to maagbot no oglibonglibong no ogpakasugat dio to baloy. Di sika no baloy, waro mapolod su dio to dakol no batu nakauntud.
Ka kommag to otow no buriak pigdayandayanan ka doldog, woy nigliboran to burunsi ka igmaroyow to igpitow ka doldog taman to pamalit.
Ko ogkohibolow on ka woig, bali ta ogko-inum.
Poiri nu to bulit ka kalisow
No ka mgo boi no nigduma ki Hisus no nigligkat sikandan to ugpaan to Galilia, nigsundulsundul ki Husi no nigkita ran ko hondoi rin isabal ka lawa ni Hisus woy songo nigkita ran pigmonu rin ka lawa ni Hisus to pogsabal din.
Nò, nigmalayat on ka pogpaap–apuloy ni Pablo ki Birnabi taman to nokogsuwoy on sikandan. Nigduma ni Birnabi si Markos no nigsakoy on to barku no oghondio to pulu to Sipri.
langub
Ko ogmarakdakoloy to goinawa to duma ta, songo du-on goinawa kanta.
Nò, sikan ian,” kagi ni Pablo, “Ayad-ayad kow oyow kono ogkatuman duon to kaniu ka impanangon to Magboboot dongan to sikan no mgo talagnangon to kagi rin to,
go-od
Dio mogdolog to baloy woy ni Sakarias no namanoik on si Maria dio to baloy ran. Poglopow rin, nigkumusta rin on si Elisabit.
Di ko sikan ka goinawa now, natalap kow. Ogkagian ku sikaniu, ko kono now ongkoran ka mgo salo now, songo unawa ka kaniu no kamatayon.”
lagalad
Mohon–ing pad ka innangonnangon ni Hudas woy si Silas no ighogot to pogtuu to mgo otow no nabuligan on ka mgo goinawa ran su mgo talagnangon sikandan to kinagian to Magboboot.
Si Jessica, nig-abin din bag ka dakol no lupung to bogas to bugkò.
Songo kuwò ko songo simana. Songo kuwò ko darua no simana.
gotad
Nò, ka igkohop-at no diwata to Magboboot, songo nighiup on to kandin no bungag, no nigmarusilom ka igkatatolu no baad to allow woy to bulan woy to mgo bituon. Omunaan no kono amana oglayag sikandan ko marusilom woy ko maallow su naawo on ka igkatatolu no baad to layag dan.
Ian su sikan ian to naabin kinow on no mgo sakup to Magboboot su oyow ogkounug ta si Kristu no nig-aguanta to kandin no igkabaybayari oyow ogkapangabangan kinow to logpad. No nohimu on sikandin no panag-ilingan ta.
Ka otow no no-ulug to baloy nabalintu-ad ka no-ulug dio to tano.
Ka batò no ungod ogsinogow taman to kapawa-an ka pogsinogow rin, sikan ka ogngaranan to oglogoy ka sikan no batò.
Ka otow no ogkannugan to kandin no kouyagan kai to kalibutan, ogkamatoy ro sikandin. Di ka otow no ogtuman to mgo sugu ku agad ian ka igkamatoy rin soini, ogbogayan sikandin to kouyagan no waro katamanan.”
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan no kagi rin, “Songo duon sagboka no inso ku kaniu. Ko ogtabakon a now ognangonan kow to puunan to katondanan ku.
Ko du-on ogkoirogò no batò woy ko buyag, no ogpoko-onow rò du-on no warò nakagimata, sikan ka na-alimukawan.
Nighutuk nigdapig no og-ampu si Hisus no unawa rod ian ka pog-ampu din.
Ogma-al-alukuyoy ka mgo buyag tongod ko du-on mgo lupuganon.
songo baloy
pusod
karigarol
Nig-inso ni Pilatu, “Nokoy naan ka malogot?” Di wa din nigtagad to tabak no niglibong dio to libuwasan dio to mgo Hudiu. Kagi rin kuwo kandan, “Waro ku man matagoi ka agad sagboka no salo din
Nokoy naan ka igmaroyow ku? Agad to litos poron ko ogbuyu a to pog-ugpo ku su ka pog-anad ku to Maroyow no Nangnangonon di ian ku igkarago su ogkohimu a no ognangonnangon kaniu to sikan no Maroyow no Nangnangonon to kono a now og-awoson no ogbayaran.
Di atag, og-awoson ta to og-unug ki to batasan to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu, no kono kid on ogdoromdom ko ogmonuon ta to ogtuman to mgo maroot no koiniatan to soini no lawa ta.
hayod
Pogkaponga, no nigpanuguntugun koy to mgo taga Tiru, no nigsakoy koy on man do to barku woy nan–uli on sikandan.
Ogmataloytoy, matul-id woy ma-awang ka pogsabut ta.
Ian su ka Nati no Karniru no duon to taliwaro to sikan no pinnuuanan to pandatuan, ian ka ogtamong kandan. Woy ogdumaan din sikandan dio to sobsob no woig no ogpokouyag kandan taman to waro katamanan. Woy konad on ogpakasinogow sikandan su og-awoon to Magboboot ka tibo no igmasakit to goinawa ran.
Utu-utu so-i homoy.
warò
Ogmangali ki atag, igsorò ta angkuan to ubal
Nig-inso ni Hisus sikandin to, “Hontow ka ngaran nu?” Nigtabak ka busow to, “Si Darasigi ka ngaran ku su marasig koy.”
Ogtuntunon ka limang
Di ka mgo Hudiu no taga Biria atag, madmaroyow to sikan no mgo Hudiu no taga Tisalunika. Ian su allow–allow, nig–ay–ayaran dan to ogpamminog to sikan no ignangonnangon woy ni Pablo. No nigpamangho dan dio to Tahan no Kasulatan no kinagian to Magboboot ko tu–tuu ian ka ogdinogon dan.
Ko waro pulus to sikan no igkasasow now no inat malomu, manio naan to ogkasasow kow pad to agad nokoy no duma no og-awoson now?”
Duon malintok no pulus ta ko og-anaron ta ka lawa ta, di dakol ka pulus ko ogkaanad ki to ogpaagad-agad to ogkoiniatan to Magboboot su sikan ka ogpakabogoy kanta to maroyow no pog-ugpo ta kuntoon woy ko uromo no dio kinow on to langit.
Nò, impasabut ni Hisus kandan ka tibo no ingkasulat ni Moisis dongan bahin kandin. Songo impasabut din to kagi to tibo no mgo talagnangon dongan to kagi to Magboboot no ingkasulat dan bahin kandin.
Poghipanow on ka sikan no nati no pigsakayan ni Hisus, igtahud dan ki Hisus, imbolat to mgo otow ka kandan no malayat no kinabo dio to ogbayaan ni Hisus.
Ko du-on otow no ogma-agbot to oghipanow no ogdabokdabok, ogkapokow kid ka noirogò.
Songo ogkounawa kinow rod su ko waro ki pad mataga to tu-tuu ian no tinuuan, nounawa ki pad to sikan no anak to datu su nakapaagad-agad kinow pad to mgo tinuuan to soini no kalibutan no kono no litos.
“Woy duon boi no nabalu no nig-ugpo to sikan no ugpaan no ungod oglibonglibong dio to sikan no talagboot no oghangyu sikandin to talagboot to ‘Pangabangi a oyow ogpakaroog a to tangko ku.’
Pogkapawo, duon mgo Hudiu no nigmouy–uyunoy woy nangulibot sikandan to woy ran ogkoon woy og–inum to agad nokoy ko ogkohimatayan dan on si Pablo.
Ian su, ko duon mgo taga Masidonia no ogduma kanak, no ko ogkitoon dan to waro pad matapid, dakol ka igkasipod ku woy songo oggoram kow rod to igkasipod now su tahan kud man ingkanangon kandan to, woy koy ogpokouma dio to kaniu, ogkatapid now on ipanoy ka igbogoy now.
Ka mgo nigtuu no dio to ugpaan to Asia no oglimudlimud no og-ampu, ogpapangumusta kaniu. No si Akila woy si Prisila woy ka mgo nigtuu no ogkalimud to og-ampu dio to kandan no baloy, songo igpanangon dan dio to kaniu to dakol so goinawa ran kaniu su nasagboka kow kandan to pogtuu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.
Malopot ka untung ta
mgo
liwarò
Woy songo pigsugu noy si Hudas daruwa ki Silas dio to kaniu no igmalogot dan ka soini no insulat noy.
Tutua kad to babuy
lit-ag
Dokad di to nig-alam to Magboboot ka nahan to mgo otow to soini no kalibutan no waro pulus oyow ogkasipod ka sikan no mgo otow no nahan dan no dakol atag ka kandan no katouanan. Woy nig-alam to Magboboot ka nahan to mohon-ing no mgo otow to kono no mabogbog kai to soini no kalibutan su oyow ogkasipod ka mgo otow no nahan dan no mabogbog.
Nakilala to mgo otow dio si Hisus. Nigpohitaga ran ka mgo otow dio to tibo no marani no mgo lunsud. Nò, nig-alap to mgo otow dio ki Hisus ka tibo no mgo nigdaralu.
Alomud
Nò, kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Kono kow on ognangonnangon to agad hontow to pighimu ku,” woy dangob no kagi rin, “Pakoona now ka bato.”
taligobò
Ian su to poghutuk ta to ogkoon to sikan no paan woy ka pog-inum ta to sikan no woig, igpohitaga ta ka kamatayon ni Hisus no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta taman to poglibong din kai to soini no kalibutan.
kapigsulan
Kuntoon mgo sulod ku, soini naan do ka mouri no ig-udling ku kaniu. Ungod now ogdoromdomon ka tibo no maroyow woy ka agad nokoy no litos no igkasayo ta unawa to: agad nokoy no tu-tuu ian, woy ka ogtahuron ta woy ka mgo batasan no maroyow woy ka waro solug no maroot woy ka litos to igkarago ta woy ka oglitos no igkabantug ta.
Oghimuon now to pighimu to amoy now no maroot.” Nigtabak kandan to, “Kono koy no anak dio to libuwasan. Sagboka ro ka kanami no amoy; ka Magboboot ian.”
pisang
tuntun
Dangob pad no mgo inso. “Waro now doromdoma ko nigpanlotiblotib kud ka paan no lalimma no impakoon to sika lalimma no libu no mgo otow? Pila no bukag ka samo?” Nigtabak kandan to, “Sampulu woy darua.”
linaw
gilang
No ka mgo otow no mohon-ing, nigsasindog to marani no nigbantoy to tibo no mgo hinimuan, di ka mgo igbuyag, nigsusumpalit dan do si Hisus to kagi ran to, “Talagpangabang sikandin to duma no mgo otow. Ko ian ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan, pitow ki pad ko ogpakapangabang to kandin no lawa!”
manduyawon
Nò, taman to tatolu no allow woy tonga, ka mgo otow no ogligkat to agad hondoi no ogkaloinloin no mgo ugpaan, woy to mgo kapunganan woy ka mgo kinagian, ogtotongtongan dan ka mgo lawa to sikan no daruwa no nammatoy, woy kono dan igbogoy ko iglobong on ka mgo lawa ran.
Pogkalugoy to ogmaal–alukuyoy ran, nigsasindog on si Pedro. No kagi rin to, “Mgo sulod, tahan kow on nataga to sikan no nighimu to Magboboot nokani, to nig–alam a rin ligkat kaniu oyow sikanak ka ogpakanangonnangon to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon dio to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu oyow ogkohimu to songo ogdinog woy ogtuu on ki Hisus.
lumayang
Songo allow to si Hisus dio to ilis to lanow to Galilia, nigkita rin ka darua no lukos no patalahari no si Simon no songo oghingaranan ki Pedro woy ka hari rin no si Andres. Nigsisigay sikandan duon to lanow su talagngangalap sikandan.
Ian su nataga kow to ogbogayan kow on uromo to sikan no igsayo no impanoy insabut to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Kristu, su sikandin ka tu-tuu no tagtuun kanta no ian ka ogtumanon ta.
Ka mgo igbuyag to kalibutan, tibo nanhimu to maroot to sikan no boi. Woy ka tibo no koot-otawan, naayat to mgo maroot no hinimuan din. No nalasing sikandan to inumanon to sikan no boi su ligkat to poghimu ran to maroot.
Dokad di, duon dod pila buwa kaniu dio to Sardis no waro now maligsomi ka pog-ugpo now su waro kow atag nanhimu to agad nokoy no maroot. Sikaniu ka ogpakaruma kanak uromo no ogpakakikinabo kow to maputi su litos ku ka mgo hinimuan now.
bangow
bukun
Di ko ogkoumaan koy to igkabaybayari noy, songo ogpakabulig to kaniu no goinawa oyow ogkohogot ka pogtuu now. No ko ogkabuligan ka goinawa noy, ka tuud to sikan, oyow songo ogkabuligan ka goinawa now ko songo duon og-aguantoon now no mgo igkabaybayari no ogkounawa to kanami no igkabaybayari no nabayaan noy.
Ko ogtumanon ta ka igsugu to Magboboot, ogkataga ki to nigdumaruma kid on kandin.
Ka tibo no mgo otow, nabolongbolong on ian woy natalap ka goinawa ran. Moin–insooy sikandan to, “Nokoy buwa ka kalitukan to soini?”
Ka mgo Hudiu dut baloy no ogtalapon dan ka goinawa ni Maria, to nigkita ran si Maria no ogsasindog no og-agpas oghipanow, nigsundul dan do. Sikan ka pigsundul dan su nahan dan no oghondio to nigsabalan no ogpandalawit.
Di nigsaparan ni Hisus si Hudas no kagi rin, “Balagara nu sikandin. Sikan no pighimu rin koddi, sikan ka igtagad din to kamatayon ku ko igsabal ad.
Nò, sikaniu ka duma ku ko ogtumanon now ka mgo igsugu ku kaniu.”
oyow
tiltil
Ko ogka-antog ka lamisaan ogkabalintu-ad ka mgo basu ka noko-untud to lamisaan. Ogkapolod ka basu no ogkabus-ug ka woig.
bukbuk
si-ak
Ka babuy no ogkaboros, ogpakotulkotul ka gotok din su oghibukhibuk ka mgo bakotin.
Su sikan ian, kono ogpokohimu si Hisus to mgo igkoin-inuan. Duon manalingboka ro no nigsamsam din no nabawian on sikandan.
Naka-ampow ka harayu to lamisaan.
towkow
Ogkasaligan ta ka Magboboot no sikandin ka nig-abin kanta to oyow ogkohimu kinow on no patalahari to Anak din no si Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
Ka ogdi-okan ta, ian ka kalatkat.
Agad duon ka mgo Griego no otow no nighondio to Hirusalim to og-ampu ko duon on ka Pagkoonan.
Sikan ian, ko ogkatagaan kud ko nokoy ka ogkabayaan ku kai to pirisuan, ogpaparagason kud sikandin to oghondio to kaniu.
mulog
pamula
“Ko hondoi no baloy ka ogdatongan now dio to songo lunsud, palinggalat kow to sikan no baloy taman to oghipanow kow on. Ian now ro koona woy inuma ka igbogoy to tagbanwa kaniu su litos no ogkabayaran ka talabau now. Ko kow oghalinhalin to pogdatongan now,” kagi ni Hisus.
Sikan ian to nighondian kow ni Huan no Talagbautismu oyow ogkatagaan now ka mgo batasan no matuwarong dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, di waro now tuui sikandin. Di atag, ka mgo otow no talagkubla to buhis woy ka mgo boi no ogpanlibug, nigtuu sikandan. Woy agad nigkita now soini, waro now ongkori ka maroot no mgo hinimuan now woy wa now ian tuui si Huan.”
salingit
Sikan ian no nigtokod on ni Pedro to tu–tuu ian ka ingkabayo din. Kagi rin to, “Tu-tuu ian nanaan to duon diwata to Magboboot no insugu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. No nigpangabangan a rin oyow kono ogkatuman ka tuud ni Hirodis woy ka nig–im–imanan to mgo Hudiu.”
Nigparagas nigkagi to, ‘Ko ogkatuman on ka allow to Pandatuan to Magboboot, ogkitoon now si Abraham, si Isaak, si Hakub lagkos to tibo to dongan no mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot woy tibo kandan dio ogpokougpo. Di sikaniu atag, dio kow ro ogpokougpo to libuwasan.’ ”
Paromdoma nu ka mgo otow to soini tibo. No to tangkaan to Magboboot, sapari nu sikandan to oyow kono dan ogpaap-apuloy to kalitukan to mgo kagi ro duon, su waro pulus to sikan, di ogpakaraat do to pogtuu to mgo otow no ogpakapamminog to kagi ran.
Kagi rin to, “Nigsaparan noy on man sikaniu to kono now on ig–anad ka ngaran ni Hisus. Di kuntoon, tibo kai to soini no lunsud to Hirusalim, pignangnangonan on to soini no ig–anad now,” kagi. “Ian buwa tuud now to ogbayungan koy nikaniu to nigpohimatoy noy ka sikan no otow,” kagi to Labow to mgo Talagpanubad to Dakol no Ampuanan.
Ka otow, du-on buliburan to puù to ulu rin no ogkohimuan no pusod
To nigkita ni Huan to mohon-ing ka mgo otow no Parisiu woy Sadusiu no ogpokouma dio to kandin oyow ogpabautismu, pigkagian din sikandan to, “Ogkounawa kow to ulod no oghilu su maroot ka batasan now. Manio no oghondini kow? Nahan now buwa no kono kow on oglogparan to Magboboot ko ogkabautismuan kow on to woig.”
Ogpoitagaan ta sikandin.
buyukut
Og-anad sikandan to kono no litos ko duon ogpangasawa woy nahan dan no duon ngalap no kono no litos no igpakoon kanta. Di nighimu to Magboboot ka tibo no ngalap. No sikanta no nataga to tu-tuu ian no tinuuan woy nigtuu on kandin, litos no ogkoonon ta ka sikan, no ogsayoon ta ka Magboboot no nigbogoy kanta.
woy nigduma ran sikandin dio ki Annas. Anogang ni Kaipas si Annas no si Kaipas ka Labow to Igbuyag to mgo Talagpanubad to sikan no tuid.
tago-od
bangkung
butbuton
olin
Duon ikug to sikan no mgo talangas no ogkoiling to ikug to salipitsipit no ogkagat. No ka kabogbogan dan to oghisakitan ka mgo otow taman to lalimma no bulan, duon ian to sikan no mgo ikug dan.
Woy ko duon igkasinogow ta, kono ta ighun-a ka pogsinogow ta. Woy ko dakol so igkarago ta, kono ta ighun-a ka igkarago ta. No ko ogpakasasaliu ki to agad nokoy, songo kono ki ogkatiglingoy to mgo kalaglagan ta di oghunnoon ta atag ka igpohimu ni Hisus kanta.
gimuat
Tapayo-on ku ka lagut
sab-a
Ko niglatun on ka manukmanuk no na-alow nu, oglotu on.
Nò, pogkapawo, nasasowsasow on ka mgo sundalu ko nighondoid on si Pedro.
Maroyow ko ogtumanon tad on ian ka sikan no labow no sugu to Magboboot no duon to sikan no Tahan no Kasulatan. No kagi rin to, “Dakola now to goinawa now ka mgo duma now un-unawoi karakol to kaniu unoy no lawa.”
Mugtas ian sikaniu no ogpan-ongkod to duma now.
Nokani no dio a pad to lunsud to Damasku, ka gobirnador no nasakup to labow no igbuyag dan no si Aritas, nigpabantayan to mgo otow ka gumawan to sikan no lunsud su oyow ogdakopon a ran poron.
dakit
Hagtongid to ogkagi su ogko-opos on ka goinawa ku koykow no ogpaka-atu ad koykow.
igù
balatinow
payag
Bali naan no naroromdom ni Pedro ka kagi ni Hisus kandin. Kagi, “Kono pad og-ukalo ka manuk, ogholos ka koddi to katatolu to wara a nu ogtokora.” Woy niglibuwas si Pedro woy nakasinogow su masakit lagboy ka goinawa din.
Kono now baadbaara ka lawa ni Kristu su kono man no sikanak no si Pablo ka namatoy no igliwan kaniu dio to krus! No ko nigpabautismuan kow, kono man no ngaran ku ka nigsampit now.
No, nakitaan to sikan no tatolu no hibatoon ni Hisus si Ilias woy si Moisis no ogpaal-alkuyoy ki Hisus.
Nò, sikan no suguanon no nigbogayan to lalima no libu impaanak din soini. Ka naanak dut salapi songo lalima no libu.
Ko du-on ka ogpalaguy, oggapunan ta oyow ogko-umaan ta.
Dio to solod to anaranan to mgo og-ampu, duon otow no noumil ka limang no bolad din. Duon ka mgo otow rio no kagi ran ki Hisus to, “Duon inso noy koykow. Ko ogtambalan ta ka otow no ogdaralu to Allow to Oghimoloy, ogpakalapas ki to Balaod?” Ian ka inso dan su ko ogbawian din, ogbayungan dan sikandin dio to mgo igbuyag dan to nakasalo sikandin to Allow ran to Oghimoloy.
ali
To waro pad niglonop ka woig no nigkokoon sikandan, woy nig-inum, woy nigmaas-asawooy sikandan taman no nigsolod woy si Noi dio to arka.
Ogdurugmun ka babuy to og-anakan din.
Ka sikan, ogkounawa to ingkasulat dongan to kinagian to Magboboot tongod to mgo Hudiu. Kagi to sulat to: “Nigbogayan to Magboboot sikandan to doromdom dan no kono ogpakasabut to kagi rin, no taman kuntoon, ogkounawa to duon mata ran no kono ogpakakita, woy duon talinga ran no kono ogpakarinog,” kagi to sulat.
Nò, sikan no suguanon no nigbogayan to laliman libu, nighondio to kandin woy nig-alap din ka salapi lagkos to lalima no libu no anak dut salapi no pigpasambayan din. Nignangon sikandin to, ‘Nigbogayan a nu to lalima no libu, woy songo soini ka anak din no lalima no libu.’
liason
Mgo sulod, soini naan do ka katamanan to ignangon ku kaniu. Tukow kow su nasagboka kow ki Hisus no Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow. Balagad ko ogkohutuk kud on sulati sikaniu to tahan no ingkanangon ku su oyow ogkohirosonan ka pogtuu now.
dokot
Si Hudas no hibatoon din no ogpanabod ki Hisus, nataga ko hondoi buwa ka soin no pinamula no kayu su malasi oglimudlimud dio si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din.
‘Balagara now pad taman to tiggaani. Ko tiggaani, ogsuguon ku ka mgo otow no oggaani to oghun-oon dan bagnusa ka hilamunon woy ogbagkosan dan on woy ogsilaban dan on. Di ka mgo tipaka to tirigu, igpatagu ku dio to pinayag ku.’ ”
Ka soini no igmarayandayan ku, kono ogligkat to boot to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta di ogkoiling do to batasan to otow no ogkaangol-angol.
da-at
mulug
kapungan
dinog
lagak
Ko Allow ran to Oghimoloy, nighondio si Hisus to anaranan to mgo og-ampu no nigbunsud nig-anad. Pogdinog to sika mohon-ing no mgo otow dio to in-anad din, noinuinu sikandan tibo. Nigmoin-insooy ka duma to, “Hondoi rin buwa kua ka natouan din? Hondoi rin buwa kua to katagaanan din? Hondoi buwa nigpuun ka kabogbogan din to oghimu to koin-inuan?
Indani now soini to imbogoy kud kaniu to kabogbogan to oyow ogpokohimu kow ogdiok to ulod woy ko salipitsipit woy ogkaroog now ka tibo no kabogbogan ni Satanas. Warad on ogkoomonuan now.”
unug
Agad nokoy ka igpohimu kaniu, ay-ayari now to oghimu. No ian now unawaan ka pogpaagad-agad now to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus, no kono do no mgo otow ka ogpaag-agaran now.
Intinuru ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din no kagi rin to, “Soini ka inoy ku woy ka mgo hari ku.
Ko ogkasaklupan ka to mausilom, mohirap nu to ogdatong to ugpa-an nu su mausilom on ka ogbaya-an nu.
Mugtas ian sikaniu no ogpan-ongkod to duma now.
patuk
Ka harina, ko konò ogbayò to ag-agan, ogtimpuruk.
nokal
sandig
ulunan to maya
bolat
hilow
Ian su duon ingkasulat dongan dio to Balaod to Magboboot no ogkagi to, “Kono kow ogpanlibug, kono kow oghimatoy to otow, kono kow ogpanakow woy kono kow ogkoiniat to kalaglagan to duma now.” No ka sikan no Balaod lagkos to duma no Balaod to Magboboot, ogkatuman ta tibo ko ogpaagad-agad ki to sugu din to, “Dakola now ka goinawa now to mgo duma now un-unawoi karakol to kaniu lagboy no lawa.” Ian ka kagi to sulat
kilki
Sikan ka kagi ku su duon allow no kono kow ogpakasolod to anaranan now to mgo og-ampu su nigtuu kow koddi. Ogpokouma rod ka allow no nahan to duma no mgo otow no maroyow ian to Magboboot ko oghimatoy kaniu no nigtuu.
“Sikan ka mgo allow no ogpakapangumow ka mgo otow to mgo matikang no bubungan no kagi ran, ‘Katobali koy on!’ woy kagi ran to sika malopot no bubungan to, ‘Kalunawi koy on!’ ” kagi ni Hisus.
sugigi
Niglouy si Hisus to mohon-ing no mgo lunsud mgo hilit. Nig-anad sikandin dio to mgo anaranan to mgo og-ampu no nigbatbatan din ka mgo otow bahin to Maroyow no Nangnangonon bahin to Pogsugu to Magboboot woy nigbawian din ka agad nokoy no dalu to mgo otow.
liom
Nigtabak ka sikan no lukos ki Hisus to, “Maistru, nigtuman ku ka tibo soini no mgo sugu ko bato a pad taman to kuntoon no buyag ad on.”
Waro pulus kandan to ogsimba koddi su ognangon dan to mgo insugu ku ian ka ig-anad dan di atag ka kandan do no mgo sugu ka ig-anad dan to mgo otow.’ ”
Songoon ka muog din.
orì
buklad
saliung
“Ko ogpasayluon now ka mgo duma now no nakasalo kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “songo ogpasayluon kow to Amoy tanow dio to Langit to kaniu no mgo salo.
To lagboy no mohon-ing ka mgo otow no nalibulung dio to kandin, nig-untud si Hisus to balutu no nigpinnuu. Dutun do ogsasindog to pantad ka mgo otow.
Sikan do Buyag, kono noy ro ogmalayaton ka ignangonnangon noy koykow. Di ogbuyu koy ro sikoykow ko ogpamminog ka to soini no ignangonnangon noy koykow no malopot do.
simò
Ian su og-iman-iman a to ogpakapanumbaloy a no ogkita a to langlanguwan nu no ogkaayun ki no ogmaal-alukuyoy.
Sikan ian no ognangonan ku sikaniu, ko hontow kaniu no ogkannugun to kouyagan din kai to ampow to tano, waro nasi kandin ko mohuri no allow. Di sikan no otow no ogbalagaron din ka igkabaybayari rin su ka pogtuu rin koddi, duon on kouyagan din dio to Magboboot,” kagi ni Hisus.
batok
Amo, ipasayo nu ro ka koykow no ngaran,” kagi ni Hisus. No, duon kagi no nigligkat dio to langit. Kagi, “Pigsayo on ka ngaran ku woy oghutukon ku pad ogpasayo.”
Amana so goinawa nu no ma-agkap!
Pogkouma ni Saulo dio to Hirusalim, nig–amut poron to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus. Di waro mogpaagad–agad sikandan su natibo nahallok ki Saulo, su waro dan tuui to songo nigtuu on ki Hisus.
Sikan ian, agad ko duon pad igkabaybayari ta no ogligkat to loinloin no mgo kohirapan, ogkarago ki ro duon.
Pogkakita ku kandin, nahallok a lagboy no napolod a ro duon to tangkaan din no noiling a to namatoy. Di niggongonan a nikandin to kawanan no bolad din woy nigkagi to, “Kono ka ogkahallok su sikanak ka kabinunsuran woy ka katamanan.
Duon duma no nigsasindog no ogtitigus di kono no malogot ka kagi ran.
Ka otow no nigtalabau dio to songo ugpa-an, nigpa-alap to nangon to asawa rin to silpon [cell phone] to ogto-od ka og-ulì diò to Kapalong ko duma pad no simana kunto-on.
Nò man, ian ka poglibuwas ni Huan no Talagbautismu dio to holholawan no ognangonnangon. Kagi rin, “Sonditi now ka goinawa now to mgo salo now woy ongkori now ka mgo maroot no batasan now woy ogpabautismuan kow no ogpasayluan kow to Magboboot.”
Nohoy–uan sikandin to Magboboot, no ian dod Magboboot ni Hakub. No nigbuyu si Dabid to Magboboot ko litos no oghimu sikandin to baloy no ogkougpaan to Magboboot.
sumbung
Oghun-a a ogpurut to kuddò nu no asolom ka pad on oghondiò to baloy ku no og-insò ko du-on igbayad ku.
Agad kon-u ku ogkaroromdom sikaniu, ungod ku ogsayoon ka Magboboot.
tago-urò
Di duon pad ogpokouma koddi no igkabaybayari ku no lagboy no mabogat so goinawa ku taman to ogkataman on.
su-an
litondan
Nigpinaan ni Hisus ka mgo otow to kono dan ogpanangon on ka agad hontow. Di agad nigpinaan, nasi do ian nignangonnangon ka mgo otow.
balbal
“Awoson no ogdakol ka kandin no bantug woy ogdoisok do ka koddi.” kagi ni Huan.
Nokani, sikanami no mgo Hudiu woy sikaniu no kono no Hudiu, kono ki ogpokogdumaruma. Di kuntoon, su ligkat to nighimu ni Hisus, nigmaawang on ka goinawa tanow woy nigsagboka kinow on ni Hisus. Ian su ka lawa rin no nigpakimatoy ka in-awo din to maroot no goinawa ta. No ka sikan, nounawa to naawo on ka alabat no nokoolot kantanow.
langkung
nangon
Kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandan to pananglitan. Kagi, “Duon dini to kaniu ka sikan no igbat-ow, di magaan ogkaawo. Hihipanow kow dio to nabat-awan no dalan to duon dod nigduma kaniu no malayag oyow kono kow ogkoumaan to marusilom. Sikan no otow no oghipanow to marusilom no waro igbat-ow rin, kono ogkataga ko hondoi sikandin ogdolog.
Sikan ian, ko nokoy ka ogbuyuon ta, woy nataga ki to ogpamminogan ki nikandin, songo ogkataga kid on to ogbogayan ki rin to sikan no nigbuyu ta.
bulukù
puntuk
bangkalow
Noinuinu ka mgo otow to pog-anad ni Hisus su dakol ka katondanan din no og-anad no kono no unawa to mgo Talag-anad to Balaod.
Ian ingkasayo dan to Magboboot su ka tuid to sikan no otow no nohimuan to sikan no kabolongbolonganan, nigsubla on to kohop–atan on ka tuid din.
Agad asukal, ogtunow, mongo asing
Di nanangnangonan sikandan to sikanak ka nokani nigbayadbayad to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus oyow ogkoongkoran dan poron ka pogtuu ran. No kuntoon, sikan dod no pogtuu ka ignangonnangon ku dio to duma no mgo otow.
katkat
Ko oggagasan ta ka lama, agad nokoy ka igkois to mgo lapok no ighatod ta diò to mariù.
pulù
Di ko duon otow no kono oghimu to maroyow, no ian ogkounawa to otow no kono ogtalabau, su ogsalig atag sikandin to Magboboot no ogpakamaroyow to otow no makasasalo, ka pogtuu rin ka ogligkatan to oghingaranan sikandin no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.
su kuntoon, dio to lunsud to Bitlihim no ian ugpaan ni Dabid dongan, duon bato no nootow. Kandin ka Talagpangabang to mgo salo now, woy sikandin ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag now.
Si Barhisus, nigdumaruma to gobirnador no si Sirgio Paulo. Sikandin, magaan ogpakasabut ko nokoy ka ogdinogon din. No impaangoy rin on si Birnabi woy si Saulo su ogkoiniat no ogpamminog to kinagian to Magboboot.
arol
Nigtabak dan to, “Si Hisus no matig Nasarit ka ogpamitawon noy.” Kagi ni Hisus, “Sikoddi man ian.” Si Hudas no nigtabod kandin, duon dio to longod to mgo sundalu.
Alipoongan.
dayandayan
Ka pog-uli to Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan, ian ogkounawaan ka pog-uli to sagboka no igbuyag no nighondio to mariu no ugpaan. Ko wa pad nigligkat, niggalat din ka baloy rin to mgo suguonon din. Ogsuguon din sikandan matag sagboka to katondanan din woy nigsugu din ka sika talagbantoy to “Bantoy ka.”
Ka sikan no mgo otow no ogsasowsasow kaniu, maroyow ku ko kono do ogpatuli di ogparagason dan nasi to ogpabakit.
now
Nò, nig-uli ka boi dio to kandan. Ko nigdatong din nigkita rin ka anak din no oghibat to hibatanan din no warad on ka busow to lawa rin.
Duon kagi ni Hisus no impananglitan din. Kagi rin, “Manio naan to ogsagmanon nu ka molintok do no nakabulog to mata to duma nu di kono ka ogsagman to duon naan no batang dut koykow no mata?
Kona a ogbuyu to og-awoon nu sikandan to soin no kalibutan. Ian ku ro ogbuyuon to ogbantayan nu sikandan oyow kono ogkaroog ni Satanas.
Ka songo igpanungayow: “Konò ka ogko-umaan to songo bulan no namatoy kad.”
Nokouma on si Simon Pedro no nigparagas nigsolod to pilang. Nigkita rin ka imbukus no manggad dio.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Kaniu ka nigkita no nigtitigus no natuman on ka sikan no mgo ingkasulat dongan.
iria
Bato-bato-i koy alapi koy bag. DB; bat-bato-i... DM
botoy
Duon manggad no ingkoolot to sikan no nokohun-a no sinabong woy duon igkaruwa no manggad no ingkoolot to igkarangob no sinabong dio to solod. No ka sikan no sinabong no dio to limang to sikan no igkaruwa no ingkoolot, nighingaranan to Kinaroyawan no Sinabong.
Di duon otow no nokouma no nignangon kandan to, “Ka mgo otow no impapirisu now gabii, diad on sikandan to Dakol no Ampuanan ta no og–anaron dan ka mgo otow.”
Du-on otow no ogsulungan sikandin to usig din no konò ogpakaponod sikandin to goinawa rin ogpaka-atu kandin.
Di to kanak no doromdom, dakoldakol ka igkarago to sikan no boi ko konad on oghutuk no ogkaasawa, no og-iman-iman a to sikan dod ka goinawa to Gimukud to Magboboot.
Ian to ignangonnangon noy kaniu ka sikan no nigkita noy woy to nigdinog noy su oyow ogpakaamut kow kanami to sikan to maroyow no pogdumaruma noy to Magboboot woy ka Anak din no si Hisu Kristu.
Og-awoson no warò ogtambabò to ignangonnangon din.
batad1
Ogpanginadlaw a pad diò ki Tià Domingga su oyow ogpakapanalapì a.
Soini ka Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod to Anak din no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu. Tongod to nigpokootow sikandin kai to soini no tano, nohimu on sikandin no kapunganan to dongan no igbuyag no si Dabid.
Ko du-on muog, ogsongaan din
“Ka mata ta,” kagi ni Hisus, “sikan ka ogkounawa to ilawan no igbat-ow to goinawa ta. Ko waro ig-atang dut mata ta, ogmaawang man ka goinawa ta.
ilom
Kagi ni Hisus to sikan no boi to, “Nigsugu a to Magboboot no ka ogbuligan ku ian do ka mgo pinanganak ni Israil no ogkounawa to mgo ayam no oghingaranan to karniru no nallagak.”
gusò
Ka otow no nighimu to baloy rin, og-omotan din to ogtapus ka oghimu su ugpa-an din on.
mabonbon
unus
Ka mgo Hudiu no nokohun-a no nigpasakup kandin, ian ta ogkounawaan ka malintok no koonon no igpayag on no igbogoy ta to Magboboot no igmaganangon to sikandin ka tagtuun to tibo. Woy songo ogkounawa rod sikandan to dalig to songo kayu. No su ka Magboboot ka tagtuun to sikan no dalig, sikandin dod ka tagtuun to tibo kandan no ian ka mgo sugpang.
Di nokoy ka innangon to sikan no Tahan no Kasulatan to kinagian to Magboboot? Kagi rin ki Abraham to, “Dogila nu ka sikan no uripon no boi woy ka anak din su ka anak to uripon, kono ogkatalaran to sikan no inggalat to amoy ran no igbogoy to sikan no anak to boi no kono no uripon.” Ian ka ingkasulat.
Kagi rin to, “Isulat nu ka tibo no ogkitoon nu woy ipaalap nu to mgo otow no nigtuu to Magboboot no dio to papitu no lunsud to Episu, ka Ismirna, ka Pirgamu, ka Tiatira, ka Sardis, ka Piladilpia woy ka Laodisia.”
Si Lukas naan do ka duma ku kai. Hinggata nu si Markos to oghondii to kanak su oyow ogpakabulig kanak.
bugsong
Pogdinog ni Hisus to nigdogil dan ka lukos, nigpamitow rin sikandin. Ko nigkita rin sikandin, nig-inso din, “Nigtuu kad on to Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan?”
Ooya nu ka batò
Ligkat to sikan, ogtumanon din ka tahan no innangon din no igbogoy rin kanta no dakol lagboy woy mahal. No ian to igbogoy rin to oyow ogpakaloko kid to mgo maroot no koibogan to soini no lawa ta no ogligkat to soini no kalibutan. No nigbogayan ki to goinawa ta no lagboy og-ayun to goinawa to Magboboot.
“Ko duon otow no oghondini koddi oyow ogkoimu porom no hibatoon ku, kono ogkaayun ko kono no dakoldakol ka goinawa rin koddi to goinawa rin to inoy rin, mgo amoy rin, asawa rin, mgo anak din, mgo hari rin, mgo kakoy rin, lagkos to goinawa rin to kandin to lawa.
amulung
Ka langosa ni Hisu Kristu to pogkamatoy rin ka imbalukas din kanta, no nigpasaylu on ka mgo salo ta. Dakol lagboy ka sikan no ingkohoy-u to Magboboot kanta,
Di ko waro pad mamatoy ka asawa rin di ogdumaruma ka boi to loin no lukos no oghulid on kandin, nakalop-ang sikandin to balaod su nakasalo on to asawa rin. Di ko ogkamatoy on ka asawa to boi, litos on no ogliwan no ogkaasawa ka boi no kono ogpakasalo su naawo on sikandin to katondanan to sikan no balaod tongod to tahan no asawa rin.
sakat
dogpak
Ogtu-uran ta to og-antog to duma ta su ogko-on kid on; ogpukawon ta.
Kagi pa ni Hisus, “Ko duon otow no ogpasakup koddi, og-unug ka sikan no otow to tibo no sugu ku su oyow agad hondoi a, songo dio sikandin. Ogsayoon to Amoy ku no Magboboot ka sikan no ogbulig koddi.”
bunsud
Sikan ian to kono kid oghagtonghagtong no ogsayo to Magboboot taman to katamanan.
Ian su, ka pigsugu a ni Kristu, waro a bogayi to katondanan ku to oyow ogbautismuan ku ka mgo otow, di nigbogayan a rin to katondanan ku to ognangonnangon to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod kandin. Di ka igpasabut ku, waro nigligkat to ogkatou to ogpangagikagi su oyow ian ighogod to pogtuu to mgo otow ka kabogbogan to pogkamatoy ni Kristu no dio to krus.
pilikpilik
Ko mausilom, ogpataliwarò [to bakbak] ka oglangkoban din ka/no atolug.
dayagang
kalungon
kaglung
Ka mgo otow no nigkamot to landingan, nigdangdang ka nigtangkò to diraya.
kois
Inogo ian no nigponga nigkagi si Pedro, nigdinog din ka igkarua no ukalo to manuk. Nò, nasumansuman din ka kagi ni Hisus kandin to “To kono pad og-ukalo ka manuk to kararua, katatolu kad on ognangon to wara a nu tokora.” Nò, nakasinogow on si Pedro to sikan pogligal din.
Pakohoy-ui now to Magboboot ka mgo otow no ogmaroot kaniu, woy ampui now ka mgo otow no ogbayadbayad kaniu.”
Ko moon-ing ka ayam ta, ogma-agkap ka pog-ugpò ta su konò kid ogkoirapan.
Nigkagi ni Hisus kandin. Kagi rin, “Maria!” Nigtangko sikandin ki Hisus no nigkagi to Hinibriu. Kagi rin, “Rabonai.” Ka kalitukan, “Maistru.”
Agad dakol lagboy ka kasasawan now to igkouyag now, kono kow ogpakatimul to pogkootow now, agad to songo oras.
sangloy
No pogdinog to mohon-ing no mgo otow to kagi ni Pilipi woy pogkita ran to mgo kabolbolonganan woy ka mgo indanan no igmalogot to ignangonnangon din, nigsagboka ka goinawa ran to ogpamminog kandin.
Nò, ko inlansang on si Hisus to mgo sundalu nigloglogoban dan on ka manggad din to hop-at no sundalu. Songo nigkuo dan ka kinabo din no hinabol no waro toia.
Ian su ka panganiban no ig-atu noy, kono ogligkat to soini no kalibutan, di ogligkat atag to kabogbogan to Magboboot no ogpakagugus to mgo ig-iilian no ig-atang to Magboboot. Sikan ian to ogkaroog noy ka mgo igpaap-apuloy
gogoyangas
Nò, nighipanow on ka hibatoon din no nignangnangonan dan ka mgo otow to og-awos to ogsonditan dan ka mgo salo dan woy ogparagas og-ongkod to mgo salo dan.
Di poglingi ni Hisus nigkita rin dod ka dangob no hibatoon din no nigsaparan din si Pedro. Kagi rin ki Pedro, “Ogkounawa to kagi ni Satanas sikan; awo ka kai to tangkaan ku. Kono ogpuun to Magboboot ka pogdoromdom nu; puun to goinawa to mgo otow ro.”
Ka otow no kono ogparoog ki Satanas, ogkohimu a no Magboboot din woy ogkohimu sikandin no anak ku.
Sikaniu no mgo otow, agad makasasalo kow, ko ogkatou kow to ogbogoy to mgo maroyow to mgo anak now, nò, labi pad atag ka Amoy tanow no dio to langit no ian ka Magboboot, igbogoy rin ka mgo maroyow to sikan mgo ogbuyu kandin.
To nigpurut ni Hudas ka paan no inhalit to sabow, nigsolod si Satanas no igbuyag to mgo busow kandin. Kagi ni Hisus kuwo ki Hudas, “Agpasa nud ka oghimuon nu.”
Ogpakasaad ka sikan no kayu no su-an no ian a-alikoy.
Ka woig no du-on saliu-an, songo du-on pusod.
Ma-agbot to poglugung.
Ko du-on pad og-insò ko hontow ka duma nu, ogkagi sikandan to, “Al-alunggun koy rò. Warò pad anak noy”.
ilag
Ka molungangon, konò no ubaton, konò ogwangal, ogkaallok no oghimu to maro-ot, ogpo-obos; ko ogko-ogotan, konò ogsagman. Ogpalingowlingow rò du-on; konò din ogsagmanon.
li-on
Nò, ko duon pa igbayung ni Dimitriu woy ka mgo duma rin no mgo talagsalsal, og–awoson dan no oghondio pad to mgo talaghusoy dio to husayanan woy ko dio to mgo igbuyag ta, no dio dan ignangon ko nokoy ka ig–ogot dan porom to songo otow.
su-ut
Ogpapangumusta a rod ki Ampiliatu no songo indakoli ku to goinawa su ligkat to pogtuu rin to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
Si Hisus, ian ka Labow to mgo Talagpanubad no litos no ogbulig kanta. Matuwarong sikandin. Waro igkoogot kandin. Woy waro man salo din. Sikandin, kono ogkounawa kanta no makasasalo. No ka Magboboot ka nigparakol ki Hisus to tibo to agad nokoy no dio to Langit.
Agad oggutasan kow kuntoon, ogkapulusan kow su uromo ogkalantoy kow ro. Kaniu no ogpakasinogow kuntoon, ogkapulusan kow su uromo, ogpakangisi kow ro.
Nò, ko ligkat to kanta no hinimuan, duon duma ta no ogpakasuwoy, ogpakasalo ki to sikan no sulod ta to pogtuu woy ogkohisakitan ta rod ka goinawa rin no moolmol pad no songo ogpakasalo ki rod ki Kristu.
lumang
Di ka sikan no otow atag no dakol so goinawa rin to Magboboot, ian ka ogtokoron no sakup din.
Ko ogkataga sikandin to ogkoirapan a, ogsalinan din ka igpaliwan.
Insulat dan ka nangnangonon no ingalat kanta no nigpuun dio to mgo otow no nigkita to mgo hinimuan ni Hisus woy songo nigbulig no nignangonnangon to Maroyow no Nangnangonon.
Pogpitow ku, duon maputi no kuddo. Ka nigpanguddo, niggongon to piot. No nigbogayan sikandin to tangkulu. Nighipanow on sikandin. No ka poghipanow rin, ian ogkounawaan ka bagani no ogpakaroog to mgo usig din.
Poglibuwas woy ni Hisus dut Dakol no Ampuanan, nigkagi ka sagboka no hibatoon din to, “Pitow ka, Maistru. Maroyow lagboy ka soin no mgo baloy woy ka daddakol no mgo batu no inhimu.”
Ka soini no sulat, nigligkat kanak no songo pogbuyagon to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu. No igpaalap ku koykow no boi no indakoli to goinawa to Magboboot, woy igpaalap ku rod to mgo anak nu. Dakol ka goinawa ku kaniu su ligkat to pogtuu ta to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon. Di kono no sikanak doka duon goinawa kaniu, su agad hontow no niggongon on to soini no tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon, songo indakoli sikaniu to goinawa ran.
laulaun
boka
Ayad-ayad kow. Nignangonan kow on panayi ko nokoy ka tibo no ogpokouma uromo.”
Nò, malogot ian ka soin no kagi ku koykow to ogpokougpo ka dio to pirisuan taman to ogkabayaran nu ka tibo no utang nu.”
dugmun
Nò, to mahapun on, nokouma ka sagboka no datu no otow no oghingaranan ki Husi no matig Arimatia. Songo sagboka no hibatoon ni Hisus sikandin.
agul
Di woy ogkatuman on ka sikan no innangon ku bahin to poglibong ku kai to kalibutan, og-awos to mohon-ing pad ka igkabaybayari ku lagkos to og-iniugan a to soini no mgo otow no og-ugpo kai to soin no kalibutan kuntoon,” kagi ni Hisus.
pangkas
Pogkaponga to sikan, duon nigkita ku no dakol lagboy no kabolongbolonganan no dio to langit no igpohitaga ko nokoy ka ogdatong on uromo. Woy duon papitu no mgo diwata to Magboboot. Tag sagboka kandan, nig-alap to mgo igbayadbayad to mgo koot-otawan kai to kalibutan. Sikan ka mohuri no mgo igkabaybayari no igdagsang to Magboboot to igkabolu din.
pantat
Ko kono pa ian ogpakatood to ogkouyag on ka mgo nammatoy, di kai ro nanaan ogkataman to soini no kalibutan ka pog-iman-iman ta ki Kristu, kanta ian porom ka mokohoy-uhoy-u.
ligitligit
bunag
konò ogkabo-otan ka goinawa
Duon otow no nohogot ka pogtuu ran no ogpakaroromdom to litos kandan ka agad nokoy no ngalap. Di duon duma no mgo otow no kono amana no hogot ka pogtuu ran no nahan dan no kono oglitos no ogkoonon tad ka sapu no ngalap, no olin no dorohunan ka ogkoonon dan no igngalap dan.
No ka ig-insò din ko ogpoko-utang to songo libu ko ogpatulinon din bua ka sikan no salapì.
Di nigtabak si Pedro ki Simon to, “Songo ogkalogparan ka rod no songo ogkoongkoran nu ro ka salapi nu. Nigmaroot ka pogdoromdom nu su ogbolion nu porom ka igbogoy ro duon to Magboboot.
Ka oghun-a ogkagi, sikan ka ogbokas to alukuyan.
tul-id
No to mgo tod-om, woy to mgo ulaging, woy ka mgo kanta, igpanangnangonoy ta ka mgo Salmo no ingkasulat dongan, woy ka kagi no ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot no igpatagu to goinawa ta, woy ogsayoon ta ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no ogligkat to igdakoli ta sikandin to tibo no goinawa ta.
Ko duon otow no ogdatong dio to kaniu di ka ig-anad din loin to soini no tu-tuu ian no ig-anad noy, kono now palopawa to baloy now, woy songo kono kow ogpangumusta kandin.
Di ko oghimuon ku ka insugu koddi, agad kona a now ogtuuan, tuu kow to sikan no oghimuon ku oyow ogkataga kow woy ogpakasabut kow on to duon kai to koddi ka Amoy ku woy duon a dio to Amoy ku.”
Sikan ian, agad kai koy pad to tano woy ko dio koy on to kandin, ian goinawa noy to ogkarago sikandin to oghimuon noy.
tibug
bandoy
Ka ilawan, songo ogpolo-polò dod
Ka babuy ka igmaganangon ku to og-indanan kud on ka kuddò.
doson
buntug
Di wa kow nigtokod kandin di sikoddi, pigtokod ku atag sikandin. Ko ignangon ku pa to wa ku tokora, ubaton a no ogkounawa kaniu. Di nataga a man kandin woy ogtumanon ku ka ogkagion din.
Ko ogma-agbot ka kalamag, og-os-os on ka ka-agboti rin.
Ko ogkasagboka-an kid on, ogparagas kid to tu-tu-u no ogdatongan ta.
a
ugpit
Nò, ka sika suguanon no nigbogayan to songo libu songo nighondio kandin. Nignangon to, ‘Buyag, natagaan ku no waro kohoy-u nu, su oggaani ka to waro nu ipamula woy oggaani ka to wa nu isawod.
Ian su ko tu-tuu pa to kono ogkouyag ka mgo nammatoy, songo waro mootawi si Hisu Kristu.
Sikan ian ka kagi ran su duon dio buwa lalimma no libu ka lukos. Nigkagian ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din to, “Baara now ka mgo otow tag kalimmaan woy papinnuua now.”
Soini ka lituk to kinagian to Magboboot. Ka igkohimu no anak to Magboboot, kono ogligkat to pogkootow ta ko pinanganak kinow ni Abraham, di ogligkat atag to pogtuu ta to innangon to Magboboot unawa to nigtuu si Abraham to sikan no innangon to Magboboot kandin.
Ka otow no apulon, konò oghagtonghagtong to ogkagi.
“Nò, to ogkatangkob on nigsugu to tagtuun to pamulaanan ka kapatas din. Kagi rin to, ‘Umawa nu ka mgo ogtalabau. Bayari nu sikandan di ko ogbayad ka, hun-aa nu to ogbayad ka namoori no mgo nigtalabau woy nu bayari ka nokohun-a.’ ”
Ka otow no konad ogkamadmad ka ogdaralu, ogkarayunan on.
Ko ogkalogtas ka balagon, sikan ka ogkatobtob.
Agad si Dabid, nighingaranan din sikandin to ‘Lagboy no Igbuyag.’ Nò, manio to ignangon to mgo otow to pinanganak ni Dabid ka Im-imanan ta ko in-umow ni Dabid sikandin to lagboy no Igbuyag?” Ka sika mohon-ing no mgo otow no nalibulung, narago sikandan to ogpamminog ki Hisus.
Nokogdulug ka nigpinnu-u.
butbut
malabakakan
Ko marusilom on to sika allow to Dominggu, nalimud ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus dio to songo baloy. Nakandaruan on ka mgo lokob su ogkahallok to mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu. Nò, nakarongan do si Hisus nigpakita dut taliwaro kandan no kagi rin, “Kono kow ogkahallok; ka kalinow, ogduma kaniu.”
tangtang
No to pog-amulung dan, nigpanabukan dan ka mgo ulu ran to obol to tano woy ogmaninsinogow sikandan woy ogmandawot lagboy no ogpaagbot to ogkagi to, “Kalogon lagboy su naraat on ka sikan no mabantug no lunsud. Ian su ligkat to kandin no igkaratui, ogpanalapi poron ka tibo no mgo otow no tagtuun to mgo sakayan to dagat. Di to songo uras do, noubus on ka tibo no mgo kalaglagan din.” Sikan ka ogkagion dan.
kolop
Sukuton ku ka payad ku dongan.
agsam
Nò, ko ligkat to pogtuu ta to ngaran ni Kristu, duon otow no ogdoot kanta, duon igkarago ta su ogkohoy-uan ki to Gimukud to Magboboot, no og-ugpo sikandin kai to kanta no ogbogoy kanta to karoyawan.
Ko du-on ogdatong no otow no oggutasan, ogbogayan to iggagow no nasamò no ko-onon oyow ogtago-od no ogko-on.
obul
Ka-awoyan ku sikoykow.
Nò, nig-inso sikandan ki Hisus to, “Umba man, ogdinogon nu ko nokoy ka ignangon to mgo bato?” Nigtabak si Hisus kandan kagi to, “Hoo, nakabasa kow man to kinagian to Magboboot no ingkasulat to songo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan no kagi rin, ‘Sikoykow, Magboboot, nig-anad nud ka mgo bato oyow litos ka pogsayo dan koykow.’ ”
Ko ogso-ol ka mgo buyag to salapì, ogligkat to songo gatus taman to songo maan no pisus.
Tongod to sayotis diò “ice”, ko nigmanipis to nigkilos, kopis ka ngaran.
Ko-ilu-an ki to mamo-on.
hantoy
Nigtuyuk dan on ka nati dio ki Hisus woy nigluung dan ka malayat no kinabo dan no impanhanig dan to poka to asno no nigsakoy on si Hisus.
obay
Tingku-a nu ka manuk.
Ian su nigdinog kow to sikan no in-anad noy tongod kandin woy og-unugon now ka mgo batasan din.
uma
Ma-awanga nu rò bag ka goinawa nu
Ka ngaran to sagboka, si Agabu. No to pogkalimud on to mgo nigtuu, nigsasindog on sikandin, no duon impanoy rin impohitaga no nigligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot to duon dakol no bitil no ogdatong to tibo no mgo ugpaan kai to kalibutan. No ka sikan no ingkanangon ni Agabu, natuman no si Klaudiu on ka Labow no Igbuyag no dio to Ruma.
Agad matikang woy ko masagkop, makopal woy ko manipis no igliu to baloy woy ko lama, ogkohingaranan no alad.
Takawon sika ubal.
Waro tahudtahud dan to Magboboot.” Sikan ka ingkasulat dongan to kinagian to Magboboot.
butaku
kunakun
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ay-ayari now to ogpamminog su ka sikan no otow no oggongon to kagi to Magboboot, ogkatimtimulan on ka igkatagaanan din, di ka otow no nahan din no nigtuu, di duon to ulu rin do, ogkaawo do ka sikan no doisok no duon to ulu din.”
Pogbunsud on to mohimulung no kalamag ligkat to dibabo no balabagan, nahan to mgo otow to maroyow on to pogligkat noy. Sikan ian no pighusud dan on ka impalibatu to barku no nigpanag–ilis koy on to pulu to Krita.
liason
komkom
Amana to nigsingallow kow to subla no mo-init
kuit
No, nigkagi ka sagboka no hibatoon ni Hisus no si Hudas no anak ni Iskarioti. Kandin ian ka ogbantaan to ogtabod pad ki Hisus. Kagi rin,
Ka kawaan woy hop-at no mgo pogbuyagon woy ka hop-at no mgo hinimu no duon goinawa, nigluhud no ogsimboon dan ka Magboboot no ogpinpinnuu dio to pinnuuanan din to pandatuan. No kagi ran to, “Malogot ian to litos no ogsayoon tanow ka Magboboot.”
bakul
Ka woig no Liboganon, makopal ka mgo tibogow diò to napu no mabasag ka lawa rin.
Og-awoson to matul-id ka tibo no ig-anad nu oyow waro otow no ogpakasamili to ignangon nu, woy to oyow ko duon pa otow no og-atu poron to ignangon ta, ogkasipod sikandin su waro man maroot no igkanangon din tongod kanta.
Tabanon man ka manggad noy
Nò, sikanak no si Huan, malayat ka pogsinogow ku su waro agad hontow no litos to ogbolat woy to ogbasa to sikan no ogbasoon.
Og-ali-ad ka miow no ogbabalintu-ad ko ogli-ag to duma rin no miow.
Duon pad mgo boni no nakasawod dut dugion no hilamunon. Nigpandagom on ka pinamula rin woy nigtulin woy nigmalayat ka mgo dugion no hilamunon no nabodboran on ka mgo pinamula.
Wa do malugoy no noumaan koy on to maagbot no kalamag no dio nigligkat to tano
kutkut
akon
Ka sikan no mgo otow no ogpakalagkos to sikan no an-anayan no pogkouyag to mgo nammatoy, ogkapulusan woy ogkoindanan sikandan to waro igkoogot kandan kono ogpakalagkos to sikan no iglogpad no oghingaranan to igkararuwa no kamatayon dio to ogliabliab no hapuy no waro katamanan. Di ogkohimu on atag sikandan no mgo talagpanubad no ogsasindog to tangkaan to Magboboot woy ki Kristu. Woy ogbogayan sikandan to katondanan to ogbulig ki Kristu to pog-alap din to kandin no pandatuan to sikan no songo malan no tuid.
“Ka tibo no mgo otow no namminog ki Huan, ogmaroyawon dan ka Magboboot. Agad ka mgo talagkubla to buhis, songo nigpaagad-agad to nangnangonon din woy nigpabautismu sikandan ki Huan dio to woig to Hordan.
tinugpù
Ka mgo batu no nig-unturan to alad to sikan no lunsud, nigpanabukan to nigkaloinloin no mahal no mgo batu. Ka immaroyow to an-anayan no batu, ian ka ogkohingaranan to haspir. No to igkararuwa, sapiru. No ka igkatatolu, agata. No ka igkohop-at, ismiralda.
libong
Tumupan to og-insò
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ko duon porom ka pogtuu now koddi agad unawa ro ka dakol to songo bogas ogko-iling ka dakol to longa, ogkaayun no ogpakasugu kow to soini no kayu to, ‘Kabarut ka duon to tano no halin ka dio to dagat,’ nò, ogkahalin do duon dio to dagat.”
malogot
din
Nò, kagi ni Hisus to, “Sikan ian ka ogkamohuri no ogdani koddi, uromo, sikandan on ka ogpokohun-a. Sikan no mgo nokohun-a sikandan on ka ogkamohuri.”
“Amo, ogkoiniatan ku to uromo no oghondio to koykow ka mgo ogtuu no insalig nud koddi. Ka koiniatan ku oyow ogkitoon dan ka karayawi ku no imbogoy nud koddi su dakol man ka goinawa nu koddi to waro pad ka soin no kalibutan.”
Ko sikanami, waro duma no ogkohimu noy ko kono no sikan do to ogpakanangonnangon koy ro man to sikan no mgo nigkita noy woy ka nigdinog noy.” No sikan do ka intabak dan to mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu.
bitu
buslagat
Itingangag to asu.
Amag dò ia ogsugut si Amò, konò ad ian.
Kuntoon, mgo sulod, ligkat to katondanan to ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu, ogbuyu a kaniu to oyow ogpouy-uyunoy kow no kono kow ogbaadbaad oyow ogkasagboka ro ka tuud now woy ka igboot now.
No si Hasun,” kagi, “pigpougpo din sikandan dio to baloy rin. Di ka sikan no mgo magaliug din, og–atu to mgo balaod to igbuyag ta no dio to Ruma su ignangon dan kanami to duon kun loin no igbuyag ta no si Hisus,” kagi to mgo Hudiu.
Ka igkarangob no allow to poghipanow to sikan no mgo otow no pigsugu ni Kornilio, ogkaranidanian on ka lunsud to Hupi. Ka sikan, tigbal do no ogkougtu on ka allow no nigpanoik on si Pedro duon to ampow to narapo no atop to baloy no nig–ugpaan din, no nig–ampu to Magboboot.
Poglogsad ni Hisus nakitaan din ka sika mohon-ing no mgo otow no nalibulung no nohoy-uan din sikandan su ogkounawa sikandan to karniru no waro talagbantoy. Nigbunsud nig-anad kandan to mohon-ing no in-anad din.
dat-ag
sayapak
Ian ku inangon kaniu to soini su ogbuligan ku porom sikaniu. Kono no tuud ku to ig-atang ku kaniu ko ogkoiniat kow to ogpangasawa. Di igtambag ku ro ian to oyow ogkohimu now ka matul-id woy ka maroyow ro no mgo batasan woy to oyow to tibo no goinawa now, ogkatuman now ka igpohimu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
Kagi ni Hisus to, “Og-inso a kaniu ko manio naan to namitow kow koddi? Waro kow mataga to kai a ro to baloy to Amoy ku?”
Ka Magboboot no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag, sikandin ka Mamabogbog to tibo woy sikandin do ian ka Magboboot ligkat dongan no waro pad nohimu ka kalibutan woy sikandin dod ka Magboboot kuntoon woy taman to waro katamanan. Kagi rin to, “Sikanak ka kabinunsuran woy ka katamanan to tibo.”
Di kagi ni Pedro to, “Agad bulawan woy ko uru, waro salapi no igkabogoy ku koykow. Di duon dod soini no igkabogoy ku. Su duon katondanan to ngaran ni Hisu Kristu no taga Nasarit, ognangonan ku sikoykow to sasindog kad woy hihipanow kad on.”
Ka bogyas, ogpu-un to bulu ka poghimu no sagboka no ighingutol to mgo ngalap to woig.
pukpuk
ko nokoy
hirogò
Si Hudas, sangoy ro ni Hudas Iskarioti, nigkagi ki Hisus. Kagi rin, “Buyag, manio ka kanami ro ka igpatokod nu to sikan no innangon nu? Manio to kono no tibo no mgo otow kai to soin no kalibutan ka ogpatokoron nu?”
Ian su duon impasulat to Magboboot dongan to, “Ogdaaton ku ka katouanan to mgo otow no nahan dan no natou sikandan woy songo ogdaaton ku ka pulus to pogkasabuti to mgo otow no naanad to dakol.”
Nigtabak si Hisus no pig-insaan din sikandan to, “Ogtuu kow on?”
poros
Waro igkoilui rin to agad nokoy woy kono ogkohimu ko duon igkabogoy ta kandin no igkohimu no utang din kanta.” Sikan ka kagi to sulat.
bolù
Ko sikoykow ka tagtu-un to songo saku no agoloy no ogba-aron nu, tongà ka igbogoy nu.
Ko ka karayawan to Magboboot, nigpapitow on pinabayo koddi no ka Magboboot ka ogpapitow dio to kandin ka karayawan ku no Kakoy to Koot-otawan. Woy oghimuon din ogparagasa soini.”
Dokad di, ka tibo soini no napulusan ku nokani, ogdoromdomon ku kuntoon no waro pulus su oyow si Kristu ka igkaliwan ku.
Mgo agpot ki rò kai to tanò
gimbal
Ian su ka Gimukud din no ingkabogoy kanta, waro din ipounawa sikanta to uripon no ogkahallok poron lagboy to tagtuun kandin. Di nighimu kinow rin on atag no mgo anak to Magboboot. No ligkat to sikan, oghingaranan ta sikandin to Amoy ta woy ogkasampit ta sikandin ki, “Amo.”
Hontow ni Lugtom si Sanglit?
Nigtabak ka otow ki Hisus to, “Kagi to Balaod to, ogtiboon ta ka goinawa ta dio to Magboboot. Woy songo ogtiboon ta ka dayagang ta to ogtuman to igsugu din puun to dakol no goinawa ta kandin, woy ogtiboon ta ka doromdom ta dio to Magboboot. No, soini rod ka kagi to Balaod to, ‘unawoon ta ka goinawa ta to duma ta to goinawa ta to kanta no lawa,’ ” kagi to sika otow ki Hisus.
lansi
“Duon to Balaod ta to kono ta ogkabobootan ka otow no nabayungan ko kono ta pad ogkohusoy. Agad woy tad ogboboot ko ogkatagaan tad ka salo din.”
dampot
Kagi ni Saulo to, “Buyag, hontow ka?” Nigtabak ka nigkagi to, “Sikanak, no si Hisus no ogbaybayaran a nu.
Kò kad ogdungkù; kò ka ogpopokù.
Nò, ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, pogdinog dan to sikan no innangonnangon ni Pablo, narago woy pigsayo dan ka kinagian to Magboboot. No ka tibo no nig–alam to Magboboot to ogpurut to kouyagan no waro katamanan, nigtuu on.
Ka inoy ni Elena, nig-insò si Manggoni, “Du-on pinayag to sika homoy nu?”
Ognangon kow to, “Ko nootow koy poron to allow to mgo kaap-apuan noy, kono noy man poron og-uyunan to pogpanghimatoy ran to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot.”
Ka sikan no otow no duon dakol no goinawa rin to mgo duma rin, ogmalayaton din ka goinawa rin kandan. Ogkohoy-uan din woy kono ogsilag, woy songo kono ogmarayandayan.
Sikan su sikan no otow no oghimu to maroot, agad nokoy no kalasi, maroot din ka igbat-ow. Kono din ogkoiniatan to ogkabat-awan su kono no gustu rin to ogkitoon ka mgo oghimuon din no maroot.
Nò, ka ogpinpinnuu to sikan no pinnuuanan to pandatuan, nigkagi to, “Og-iamon kud on ka tibo.” Woy nigkagi to, “Isulat nu ka soini su malogot ian ka soini no ignangon ku woy lagboy no ogkasaligan.”
Ko ogkohimu pa poron, ogbalagaron ku ko sikanak ka ogkalogparan woy ka ogkaluwat ki Kristu oyow ogkapangabangan ku poron sikandan to logpad.
Du-on otow no ogko-iniat to bogyas. Og-insò to, “Ogko-olog bua to goinawa nu ko ogsaliuan ku to manuk”
To pogkita to mgo otow no dio niglopow si Hisus to baloy ni Sakiu, nigmugongmugong ka mgo otow no kagi ran to, “Dio atag nigdatong si Hisus to baloy to otow no makasasalo.”
Kanokali nu to ogtalabau to sikan no impatalipun koykow to Magboboot oyow ogkasayo ka nikandin, woy to oyow waro igkasipod nu. Woy og-awoson to matul-id on ian ka ig-anad nu to kinagian to Magboboot no tu-tuu ian.
Ko ogkabasa now, ogkatagaan now on ka pogsabut ku to soini no tuud to Magboboot no ingkoholos dongan tongod ki Kristu
Ogdungkù ki ko ogholos ki.
Ka mgo Monobo, ko ogbobolow to ko-onon no homoy, ogtongoson to doun to saging
Woy ogpasabut ku si Saulo ko songo monu ka ogpokouma kandin to igkabaybayari no ogligkat to pogtuman din kanak,” kagi ni Hisus.
“No,” kagi ni Hisus, “namatoy on si Lasaru no ka mgo diwata no suguanon to Magboboot, nig-alap dan ka gimukud din dio to langit to longod ni Abraham” “Songo namatoy on ka datu no inlobong on to mgo otow ka lawa rin.
Nigtoluk ku oyow konò og-iasan.
libaw
Woy songo kono ki oghilabot to kono no asawa ta no ogkounawa to nohimu ran no kawaan woy tatolu no malan no otow ka nammatoy on to sagboka ro no allow su ligkat to salo dan.
lantok
Ongot ku dò
Pogkita ni Hisus to boi, nig-umow rin sikandin no kagi rin kandin to, “Igi, nabawian kad to oggoramon nu,”
li-ag
Nò, ligkat do to sagboka ro no bo-bo ta, duon igsayo ta woy ka igpanungayow ta to duma ta. Mgo sulod, kono man no litos ka sikan.
Nò, ka sikan no otow no nataga ko nokoy ka maroyow no oghimuon din porom di kono din atag ogtumanon, ogpakasalo on sikandin.
doromdom
hasò
Nigkagi si Hisus to, “Kono nu ogbobooti ka duma nu oyow songo kono ka ogbobootan to Magboboot.
Di si Hisus atag nakasabut to maroot ka tuud dan woy nigtabak sikandin to, “Manio to oggawayan a now porom, mgo patuutuu ro so pogtuu now to Magboboot?
Di tongod to Anak din, soini atag ka innangon to Magboboot. Kagi, “Taman to waro katamanan, Magboboot, waro katamanan to pogpangatondanan nu. Woy ogkaayun lagboy ka pog-alap nu to sikan no katondanan nu.
Du-on batò no magalat ka ngipon din. Ka ngipon din, du-on olatan no ma-awang.
Di duon ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod to mgo Hudiu no ian duma to mgo Parisiu no mambabantoy ki Hisus ko ogbawian din ka otow no noumil so bolad din to Allow ran to Oghimoloy oyow ogkitoon dan ko duon igkabayung dan ki Hisus tongod to Allow ran to Oghimoloy.
lawod
Sikan ian no nanhondio ka mgo otow su ogpitawon dan ko noomonu on ka lukos no pigbusawan on. To nigdatong ka mgo otow dio ki Hisus, nigkita ran ka lukos no warad on ka mgo busow to lawa rin. Nanginabo on no duon on nigpinpinnuu to marani to paa ni Hisus. Maroyow on ka pogdoromdom din to warad ka mgo busow. Di nahallok ka mgo otow.
pagtù
Nò, nigkagian ni Hisus ka nalibulung no mgo otow woy ka mgo hibatoon din. Kagi rin to,
Nò, nig-inso ni Hisus ka sika no sampulu woy darua no hibatoon din no nig-alam din to, “Sikaniu, songo ongkod kow buwa koddi?”
Ka baloy ko ian dò bintanà, ispiu, mo-ilag dò su ogkito-on ta rò ka limang su ma-awang ka pogpitow ta.
Hari nu no dangob.
li-ag
Ko oglapas ki, ko konò ki ogpakabatuk to mababow su mabolbol ka woig, ogka-alus ki diò to maralom. Ogpakalumbuk kid on.
“Kono no litos no oghipanow sikandan kuntoon,” kagi ni Hisus. “Sikaniu ka ogbogoy kandan to ogkoonon dan.”
Di kono nud ilagkos isulat ka ngaran to mgo balu no bato-bato pad su nahan pa ko ogkoumaan on sikandan to pigkoibog to lawa ran, ogkoiniatan dan on ko duon og-asawa man do kandan no oglingawan dan ka tuud dan poron ki Kristu.
Wà pad ugat.
Ka batò no ungod ogsinogow su nig-ingol to inoy rin ka oghilamun, ogdabuyuan on su ogdaralu on.
layat
banhow
Soini no mgo otow, nigmakogal ka ulu ran. Nigsampongan dan ka talinga ran woy nigpiong dan ka mata ran. Ko waro pad porom sikandan nighonduon, no ogpakakita porom sikandan woy ogpakarinog sikandan woy ogpakasabut porom sikandan to litos woy ogsalig porom sikandan koddi, no oglipuasan ku sikandan.’ ”
langi-on
Ka kinabo ni Huan, pighabol to bulbul to ayam no oghingaranan to kamil woy ka nagangu no laplap to ayam ka pighimu to igholonon din. Ka igkouyag din, talangas woy tonob.
pangalug
Ian su, tagood to kai a pad to soini no kalibutan, maroyow no igparinog ku kaniu ka sikan oyow kono now ogkalingawan.
Woy doromdoma now no, ka sikan no waro kow pad nigpasakup ki Kristu, waro pad labot now kandin woy songo waro labot now to mgo Hudiu no ian mgo pinanganak ni Israil no nohimu no sakup to Magboboot. Woy songo waro kow pad nakalagkos to mgo karoyawon no innangon to Magboboot no igbogoy rin to mgo sakup din. No nan-ugpo kow ro kai to ampow to soini no kalibutan to waro im-imanan now ko ogkabuligan kow to Magboboot su waro kow pad mataga kandin.
Ko og-init ki to woig, igdapig ta su oghibalawan ta ka woig.
nasì
Songsongon ka sakaru.
Woy duon pad dangob no sulat no nigkagi to: “Mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, sayaa now ka Magboboot. Woy tibo no mgo otow, sayaa now sikandin.”
to-u
Ko kandila-on ka ikug to itù, konò og-ayam to mgo otow su nahan dan no pamalili.
Di kagi ni Simon kuwo ki Hisus, “Buyag, kono a man og-ongkod koykow. Agad songo ogkapirisu a woy ko songo ogkamatoy a, nakapanagana on ka goinawa ku oyow ogpakaruma a ro koykow.”
Nanligad on ka pila buwa no mgo tuid woy pad nokouma si Huan no Talagbautismu dio to holholawan to probinsia to Hudia no ognangonnangon bahin to kagi to Magboboot.
Ian su ka an-anayan no lukos, waro nigligkat to boi. Di ka an-anayan no boi, nigligkat atag to lukos.
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, og-awoson to kono kid on ogpaboot to mgo maroot no ogkoibogan to soini no lawa ta no ogkamatoy ro, su og-awoson to kono kid on ogtuman to sikan no mgo ogkoibogan to soini no lawa ta.
Nigdanian din ka napalian no nigtambalan din on ka mgo pali din to lana woy bino, no nigbukusan din on ka mgo pali din. Pogkaponga, nigpountud din ka napalian to asno rin no nigtuyuk din on taman to nokouma on dio to datonganan to magaliug no baloy no ogbayaran. Nigpouyamu rin pad ka napalian.
Di kono no litos ko ogdinog ki ro duon to kagi rin. Di og-awoson to ogtumanon tad on, su ko ogdinogon ta ro no kono ki ogpaagad-agad to kinagian din, ogkoubatan ta ro ka kanta no goinawa.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandin to, “Agad ko ogkoiniatan ku to ogkootawan sikandin taman to poglibong ku, nokoy naan so labot nu kandin? Sikoykow, unug ka ro koddi.”
Di ko naang–anggaan on sikandin, nakita on to boi no anak to igbuyag to Ehipto. No pig–uyamu rin on si Moisis no pig–iling din to anak din on ian lagboy.
Ko oglimudlimud kow to oglabung oyow ogdoromdomon now ka kamatayon ni Hisus, kono now ogdoromdomon sikandin.
sampon
solag
Nò, to nigdinog ni Hisus sikandan nigsagdok sikandin woy nig-inso to, “Nokoy ka ogkoiniatan now no oghimuon ku kaniu?”
Nò nighipanow on si Hisus. Dio to nigbayaan din, nigkita rin ka sagboka no talagkubla to buhis no nighingaranan ki Matiu no nigpinpinnuu dio to opisina rin to bayaranan to otow to buhis dan. Kagi ni Hisus kandin to, “Duma ka koddi, ogsakupon ku sikoykow.” Nigsasindog si Matiu woy nigduma on ki Hisus.
balingotngot
Gabi-i pad nig-anak on ka kuddò ku.
Ka igbuyag din, nignangon to, ‘Maroyow ka pighimu nu. Ogkasaligan ka no suguanon ku. Tongod to ogkasaligan ka to doisok no salapi, songo ogkasaligan ku rod sikoykow to dakol. Hondini ka oyow ogkatalaran ka to igkarago ku.’
oglow
Kò pad ogpaksagkow.
Nigtabak si Hisus, “Waro a masolori to busow. Ko sikoddi, ogsayoon ku ka Amoy ku. Di sikaniu atag, ogsumpaliton a now ro.
Ian su duon otow no maroyow no nigbobootan now woy nigpohimatayan now di waro nig-atu kaniu.
Narago ad no nokouma on kai si Istipanas, si Portunatu, woy si Akaiku. Ian su sikandan, nohimu no magalawa now no inliwan kaniu no taga Kurintu no waro kow makaruma.
Ogbuyu a ki Hisus no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow nikandin.
la-ag
Du-on sinaligan din no talag-uyamu to mgo pinamula no ian si Kalayag.
madmad
Kohoy-u kaniu no mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy mgo Parisiu. Patuutuu ro ka pogtuu now. Oghondio kow to doipag to mgo dagat woy oghipanow kow dio to ilis to soin no kalibutan, oyow oghinggaton now ka agad sagboka no otow dio to og-ongkod to kandin no tinuuan oyow og-unug to kaniu no tinuuan. Di ko natuman on, lagboy no sakup sikandin ni Satanas no litos to igdogpak sikandin dio to imperno, tagkos to kaniu.
Ian su duon impasulat to Magboboot dongan. Kagi rin to, “Ka an-anayan no otow no si Adan, nohimu on no pinagogoinawa to kandin no lawa.” Si Hisu Kristu no oghingaranan to mohuri no Adan ka ogpakabogoy kanta to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
Nò, duon dangob no niglibuwas no kuddo no malalab lagboy. Ka nigpanguddo to sikan, nigbogayan to katondanan din to og-alap to samuk kai to soini no kalibutan oyow ogmabunbunuoy ka mgo otow. No nigbogayan sikandin to dakol lagboy no balarow no malayat.
sawilò
Pogdinog ni Hisus to kagi to mgo otow no nigligkat to kapitan, nabolongbolong sikandin. Nigbalikid si Hisus dio to mgo otow no mohon-ing no ogluyud kandin no kagi rin kandan to, “Malogot ka soini no ignangon ku kaniu. Waro ku kitaa ka pogtuu to agad hondoi no otow agad to mgo pinanganak ni Israil no ogpakasokod to pogtuu to sikan no kapitan,” kagi ni Hisus.
Nig-abin din on no kandin no gabas.
Ka baloy ni Amò, ogbantangan to allow. Ko ogsilò ko masolom on, lagboy ogkabandogan to layag to allow.
liliungan
No sikan ian to nigtamporan on to mgo sundalu ka lubid no ingkohikot to balutu no pigbalagad dan on ka naanlas.
Nò, mgo sulod, su nigtuu kid on, nounawa to nalagkos kinow on ki Kristu to pogkamatoy rin. No sikan ian to warad on labot ta to mgo tinuuan to soini no kalibutan no ogligkat to mgo busow woy ko mgo otow. No su tu-tuu ian ka sikan, og-awoson to kono kid on ogpaagad-agad to igsapad to mgo talag-anad to sikan no mgo tinuuan no ignangon kaniu to,
Di kagi atag ni Pablo to, “Sikanami, nasakup koy to gobirnu to Ruma no waro koy pad insaa ko duon salo noy woy ko waro di nigpabarasan koy ran dio to kohon–ingan to otow woy impapirisu koy on. No kuntoon, ogpoholoson koy ro porom to ogpalibuwas. Di kono ogkohimu. Og–awoson to oghonkai pad ka mgo pogbuyagon, su sikandan lagboy ka ogduma kanami dio to libuwasan,” kagi ni Pablo.
Nò, nighipanow sikandan dio to Bitlihim. To diad on sikandan to dalan, nigkita ran man do ka sikan no bituon no nigkita ran no nigsilo dio to ogsilaan to allow. Narago lagboy sikandan to pogkakita ran to bituon. Sikan no bituon ka nigtuon kandan taman to longod to baloy no duon ka sikan no bato.
Ka kayu no baliok, malalab woy mabasag ka lawa rin no ighimu to subong to wasoy, doldog to kommag woy ka igtimul to baloy su konò ogbokbokon.
pondakan
Ka otow no napali-an, nigkuò to manggad no inbodbod to pali din.
gos-own
bigtow
kinurus
iling
Nigsasindog si Pablo no nigkamoy rin sikandan oyow ogpahagtongon on ka ogkakagi. No kagi rin to, “Mgo duma ku no mgo pinanganak ni Israil, woy tibo kaniu no ogtahud to Magboboot, pamminog kow.
Panayon noy to sabut, ko hontow ka og-aguanta to ogduma, kandin ka ogka-alam.
Ko nigmarani on woy si Hisus to dangob no mgo hibatoon din, nigkita ran ka nalibulung no mgo otow no niglingotan dan ka mgo hibatoon no duma. Songo duon dod ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod dan no ogpaap-apuloy to mgo hibatoon din.
opuy
balitì
Ko nigtakasan dan on to nigsumsumpalit pigluungan dan ka sikan no malayat no kinabo no moitom-itom woy nigliwanan dan ka tahan no manggad din. No, niglibuwas on sikandan no nigduma ran sikandin oyow iglansang dan sikandin dio to ampow to krus.
Songo awoson now no kono kow ogpakiamoy to agad hontow kai to tano su sagboka ro ian ka Amoy now no sikan ka Magboboot no dio og-ugpo to langit.
pusù
how-as
bahag
naan
Ognangonan ku sikaniu no kona ad oghutuk og-inum to inumanon taman to allow uromo ko ogkatibo ki man do og-inum to iam no inumanon. Ogkoimu soini ko ogkatuman on ka Pandatuan to Amoy ku no Magboboot.”
Ogpariaydiay ki ko oghipanow
No duon pigkita ran to ogkoiling to mgo logdog to hapuy no nigtangkap on no dio nakalogob nokountud to mgo ulu to tibo no mgo otow no nalimud.
Igpalayud ku ka kuddò oyow ogpaka-alam sikandin to ogkako-on din. Nig-awò ta diò to lunsud ka sikan no kuddò.
Di nigtabak si Pablo to, “Soini ad kuntoon to tangkaan to bobootanan no ogpakaalap to katondanan ni Sisar no ian Labow no Igbuyag ta no dio to Ruma. Woy kai ian porom ka litos no ogbobootan a nu. Nataga kad on man to waro salo ku to mgo Hudiu.
Di pananglitan ko noiniatan ku pa no ogsayo-sayo to kanak no lawa, waro porom igkasipod ku su tu-tuu ian ka ignangon ku. Di kono a ogsayo-sayo su oyow kono ogkasublaan ka igbantug to mgo otow kanak. Ka maroyow ku, ko ian do ogligkatan to doromdom dan kanak ka nigkita ran no batasan ku woy ka nigdinog dan no mgo in-anad ku kandan.
bislig
pagkol
Songo allow, ka Allow to mgo Hudiu to Oghimoloy, si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din, nakabayo to kamot to tirigu. Nigpanggutasan ka mgo hibatoon no nigpupu sikandan to pila buwa no tagdoy to tirigu, no nigkoon dan on.
pakakuò
kalaponit
Ko tongod to baloy no og-awos to ogmatikangon, og-alikan to nanoynanoy su awos to ogsongolan.
Intampak ta ka so-ob to balpin diò to lawa rin.
Di kono ki ogkabolongbolong to sikan, mgo sulod, su agad si Satanas, songo kuwo ko ogpoiling-iling sikandin to diwata to Magboboot.
Di nig-ugsul on ni Hisus to maagbot no goinawa rin no nigtabak din to, “Kaniu no mgo otow no nabuhi pad kuntoon, manio naan to ogpamitow kow to poindanan no ogpuun to Magboboot? Ogkagian ku sikaniu to waro poindanan no igpapitow ku to soin no mgo otow.”
No ko oglibong si Hisus no ian Lagboy no Talagtanud kanta, og-alapon din ka igsayo din kanta woy ogtalaran din sikaniu to karoyawan to pogpangatondanan din no kono ogkaawo to waro katamanan.
Duon songo luti no tano ni Birnabi no induwad din. No ka salapi no imbayad to tano din, nig–alap din woy insabuk din to tangkaan to mgo suguanon ni Hisus.
lituk
Nò, nigsugu man do to tagtuun ka dangob no suguonon din dio to pinamula rin. Niglamposan ka ulu rin to mgo talagbantoy woy nigpasiporan dan sikandin.
Kagi ni Satanas ki Hisus “Tibo soini, igbogoy ku koykow oyow koykow on ka duon kabogbogan woy ka karatui to soini tibo. Tongod to nigbogayan ad to tibo, ogkoimu koddi ko hontow ka ogbogayan ku to soini.”
doromdoma now to, ka sikan no otow no ogbulig to og-oson to goinawa to songo otow no makasasalo, ogpakapangabang kandin to kamatayon woy ogkaawo on to Magboboot ka mohon-ing no mgo salo din. Santiago
obol
Ko ogdinogon now ka gira no marani woy ka balita to duon dangob dio to mariu, ko kow ogkasasow. Og-awos to ogpakatood ka soin no mgo gira di kono pad ogpokouma ka mohuri no allow.
To nakaponga nig-anad si Hisus to soini no mgo pananglitan, nighipanow on no nig-uli to lunsud din.
Nigtabak si Hisus kuwo kandan to, “Nigkagi a no impapitow kud dio to mgo otow ka tibo no in-anad ku. Pig-anad a dio to mgo anaranan to mgo og-ampu woy dio to sikan no Dakol no Ampuanan ta no sikan ka limuranan to tibo no mgo Hudiu. Waro ku iholos ka kagi ku.
Ka sikan, ogkohimu on no salo dan su konad ogtuman ka innangon dan kandin.
Sikan ian to og-awoson to kono kid ogsayo-sayo ko hondoi longod no talag-anad ka ogkoiniatan ta, su sikanta no nigtuu, nohimu kinow on no talagtuun to tibo no imboot to Magboboot.
Ka otow no kono ogparoog ki Satanas, ogbogayan ku to oyow ogpokougpo sikandan dio to ugpaan ku dio to langit to waro katamanan. No ian dan ogkounawaan ka mgo suloy to sikan no Baloy no Ampuanan to Magboboot. Kono og-awo sikandan to sikan no baloy. No igsulat ku dio to kandan ka ngaran to Magboboot no ian Igbuyag ku, woy iglagkos ku to igsulat ka ngaran to sikan no dakol no lunsud to Magboboot ku. Sikan ka iam no Hirusalim no ogligkat dio to langit no oglogsad kai to tano. Woy songo iglagkos ku to igsulat kandan ka iam no ngaran ku.
bangì
Talaghimu to baloy ro sikandin no anak ni Maria woy kakoy sikandin ki Santiago, si Hosip, si Hudas, woy si Simon. Woy ka mgo ataboy rin duon kai to kanta.” Nò, nigmasakit so goinawa ran kandin no kono ogtuu ki Hisus.
Ko’gsugu-on a nu, si Kunsay ogsasindog.
Pogkaponga, nigkoon on woy nouli on ka dayagang din. No to pila pad no allow to pog–ugpo ni Saulo dio to lunsud to Damasku, nigluyudluyud on to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus.
No kuntoon, su ligkat to nasagboka kinow on ki Hisu Kristu woy su nigtuu kinow on kandin, kono kid ogkasipod to ogdani to Magboboot no og-ampu.
og-ayamon
balingù
Di Amo, kona ad ogmalugoy kai to soin no kalibutan su og-uli a dio to koykow. Di sikandan, palinggalat do kai to soin no kalibutan. Woy Amo, koykow no waro salo, bantayi nu sikandan pinabayo to kabogbogan nu no unawa ian to kabogbogan no imbogoy nud koddi. Bantayi nu oyow kono ogkalagak dio to dalan no oghondio to koykow oyow ka tibo, ogkasagboka ro dio to koykow no unawa si koddi woy sikoykow, salupungan ki ro.
Ligkat to lagboy a no natiglingoy to nigtotoì, nalingow a to ogsusugba to iglabung [noy].
Pogkouma woy ni Pablo dio to Hirusalim, ka mgo nigtuu woy ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus woy ka mgo pogbuyagon dan, narago lagboy to pogkouli dan. No nigbatbatan on woy ni Pablo sikandan to tibo no impohimu to Magboboot kandan dio to nabayaan dan.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Kono now sapari, su ka otow no kono og-atu kanta, duma ta rod sikandin.”
Ian su nanangonan koy to manokal ka pogtuu now ki Hisu Kristu woy to dakol ka goinawa now to tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu on kandin.
Ka sikan no mgo Labow to mgo Talagpanubad, ogkohimu ran no og-ay-ayaran dan ka goinawa ran to mgo otow no ogpakasayop su ligkat to waro dan pad mataga ko nokoy ka litos no oghimuon dan. Woy songo ogkohimu no ighimulung dan dod ka ighimu ran to mgo otow no ogpakasuwoy. Ian su sikandan no mgo Labow to mgo Talagpanubad, songo malomu ka goinawa ran to ogpakasayop.
Tibò no du-on bonsag, ko ogtaman on to ogbogas, ogkamatoy on no basiow ka igngaran su ka lisuan din, ogkamolù on; oglungagon on.
Ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus, nigpaap-apuloy ko hontow dapit kandan ka labow to ngaran.
silag
Dokad di nakatood soini su oyow ogkatuman ka nasulat to Tahan no Kasulatan ran bahin koddi. Kagi, ‘Nasundug a agad waro nighimu ku kandan.’ ”
siit
Ko tu-tu-u ian ka bonnal to nakasalò, ogbotad dan on ka nakasalò to husayan.
how-ang
Nò, ian do ogpakasabut to soini ka otow no mougsob to pogdoromdom din. Ian su ko mougsob ka pogdoromdom din, ogpakabatuk to lituk to sikan no numiru to sikan no magintalunan. Su ka numiru, ogpakalituk to ngaran to songo otow. No ka numiru rin, hon-om no gatus, kohon-oman woy hon-om (666).
baguguy
ogba-adba-aron
Amana-amana ka bag no sasampoton koddì.
sabun
tipù
Konò ku ogpomo-uli-on.
Pokog-un-unawaa.
Hontow naan ka ubaton? Ian ubaton ka otow no ognangonnangon to, “Si Hisus, kono no ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan no oghingaranan ki Kristu.” Ka otow no ogkagi to sikan, ogpokounug to batasan to otow no og-usig ki Kristu su ogligalon din ka katondanan to Amoy ta no dio to Langit woy songo ogligalon din ka katondanan to Anak din no si Hisu Kristu.
kilid
ginibang
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ko ogpakarogpak ka otow no ogkoulug to sikan no batu ogkaloput ka lawa rin di ko ogkoulugan on sikandin to sikan no batu no ogkaapug on ka lawa rin.”
Pogdinog dan to soini, nabolongbolong sikandan no nighipanow on sikandan.
Nò man, magaan nakalogob ka pogkabantug ni Hisus to agad hondoi no lunsud dio to Galilia.
tondok
nguog
Di du-on og-abalang no konò ogpoko-uwang ko ognangon.
Ko duon on ka igpaalap dan, pigsugu dan si Saulo woy si Birnabi oyow sikandan ka oghatod to impabogoy ran dio to mgo pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu no dio to Hirusalim.
lanang
Kagi rin to, “Koddi no Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan, og-awoson to ogkabaybayaran a pad. Ka mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu woy ka mgo igbuyag no mgo talagpanubad to Magboboot no dio to Dakol no Ampuanan ta, woy duma to mgo talag-anad to Balaod ta, ogsamilian a ran woy og-iniugan a ran no ogpohimatayan a ran di ka igkatatolu no allow to pogkamatoy ku, ogkootawan a ro.”
Wà din nasalabò ka indogbak su nigligad ka bula di nakatamuk ka dangob.
Ian ka ignangon ku kaniu to soini su ogbogayan to Magboboot ka tag sagboka no otow to sokod to mgo hinimuan dan.
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi din to, “Wa kow buwa makabasa to kagi to Magboboot no ingkasulat dongan bahin ki Dabid no Igbuyag ta dongan woy ka mgo sakup din. Niggutasan sikandan no nanhondio sikandan to Igbaloy to Magboboot woy nigsolod sikandan.
laglag
bolat
“Kono kow ogkabolongbolong to kagi ku,” kagi ni Hisus to mgo otow, “to ogpokouma ka allow no ogdinogon to tibo no namatoy ka ig-umow ku.
Di ko duon otow no kono ogpaagad-agad to soini no insugu ku, songo kono now ogpamminogon.
Woy ka mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot nokani, tibo, namatoy on. Kono nu buwa ignangon to labow ka to kanami no amoy no si Abraham no namatoy on? Nokoy ka pogtuu nu koykow? Hontow ka man?”
su koddi no ian Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan, kono ogpokoholos ka poglibong ku kai to tano. Ogpakakita ka tibo no mgo otow to poglibong ku unawa to tibo no mgo otow ogpakakita to kilat no ogpakatigbas to langit ligkat dio to kabinunsuran to langit no ogpokouma dio to koopusan to langit no ogkabat-awan on ka tibo no tano to layag din.
buhù
No sikan ian to duon dod allow no tag sagboka kanta, ogpakanangon ki kandin to tibo no nohimu ta to kai ki pad to tano.
tomu
balingù
tiglingoy
panubigon
Timoteo, to kai ki to tangkaan to Magboboot, duon igsugu ku koykow su oglibong si Hisu Kristu kai to tano no ogkohimu on sikandin no Lagboy no Igbuyag to tibo no mgo otow, no ogbobootan din on sikandan tibo, ka mannokal pad woy ka mgo nammatoy.
maman
Ogkarago a ro ko duon mgo igmalotoy to lawa ku, woy ko duon ogsumsumpalit kanak, woy ko duon igkohirapi ku woy ko duon igkabaybayari ku woy ko duon duma no mgo kohirapi ku su ligkat to pogtuu ku ki Hisu Kristu. No ian su, ko malotoy a ogkabogayan a to kabogbogan ni Hisus.
Ka tu-tuu ian no goinawa ku, ogkarago a no ogtuman to mgo koiniatan to Magboboot.
Ian su duon on mgo otow no nigtuu on to sikan no tigbal no katagaanan, no nakasuwoy on sikandan to tu-tuu ian no tinuuan. Ogbuyu a to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow tibo ki Hisu Kristu.
Ko duon inso dan poron, og-awoson to ogtagad no dio to baloy og-inso to asawa ran. Ogkasipod ki ko ogkagi ka mgo boi ko oglimudlimud ka mgo otow to og-ampu.
olog
Komkomon so-i mundù.
Pogdinog ni Ananias to kagi ni Pedro, napolod do duon no naparagas on namatoy. No ka tibo no mgo otow no nakarinog to sikan no nabayaan ni Ananias, nanahallok lagboy sikandan.
sompok
Niglingi si Hisus no nigpitow ki Pedro no naroromdom ni Pedro to impanoy innangon to igbuyag din kandin to nigkagi si Hisus kandin to, “Woy og-ukalo ka manuk ko magaan ogkapawo katatolu nud ignangon to waro ka mogtilala koddi.”
Woy og-inso a ko hontow ka ogsusumpalit to sikan no mabantug no ngaran ni Hisu Kristu no ian ka nig-abin kanta? Ian dod ka mgo datu.
Ogpatuutuu kow no mgo otow. Malogot ka innangon ni Isaias bahin kaniu no igkasulat dut kagi to Magboboot no nigkagi to,
Ian su nabatukan noy si Pablo to talaghimu to samuk sikandin su agad hondoi ogdolog kai to kalibutan, ogsasawon din ka mgo Hudiu. No si Pablo dod ka songo igbuyag to songo sampangan to mgo otow no og–unug to otow no taga Nasarit,” kagi ni Tirtulu.
Kohoy-u kaniu no mgo talag-anad to Balaod woy mgo Parisiu. Patuutuu ro ka pogtuu now to Magboboot. Imbogoy now to Magboboot ka igkasampulu no talad kandin, agad ka mgo aanag to mgo ogkakoon. Nigtuman now soini di waro now tumana ka dakoldakol pad no mgo ig-anad to Balaod no ogkounawa to: malogot no poghusoy now, woy pogkohoy-u now to mgo duma now, woy to maboot kow to duma now. Awoson no igbogoy now to Magboboot ka igkasampulu no talad, di songo awoson no kono now ogbalagaron ka mgo dakoldakol pad no mgo ig-anad to Balaod.
batu
Nig-inso ni Hisus, “Hontow ka nigsamsam to kinabo ku?” Di nigwaro-waro ka tibo no mgo otow. Kagi atag ni Pedro ki Hisus to, “Amana to og-inso ka. Nokoy naan to mohon-ing no mgo otow no nokog-akob-akob no marani on lagboy dio to koykow?”
tosan
Pogpitow ku, duon dangob no kabolbolonganan no dio to langit. No nigkita a to malalab no ulod no dakol lagboy no oghingaranan to daragun. Duon papitu no ulu rin, no nalogob to tangkulu. Woy sampulu ka mgo sukat din.
Ko nigsakoy ki to diip ligkat to Valencia, du-on ki to Bagunta-as ogpagtonga-an din to Nasuli. Ka sikan, nakataliwarò to nigsakoy.
Agad to waro pulus ku to pogsayo-sayo ku, di ogpakasayo-sayo a ro duon to oghitagoon ku sikaniu to duon impapitow woy duon mgo impasabut din to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta kanak.
Nignaasnaas do sikandan su ogkahallok do to mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu.
Kono man no maroyow no nangnangonon ka sikan su sagboka ro ka maroyow no nangnangonon no ian ka in-anad noy kaniu. No ian ku ogkagian sikaniu to soini su duon mgo otow no ogsasowsasow kaniu su ligkat to ig-anad dan. Ian su ogbalbalawon dan porom ka maroyow no nangnangonon tongod ki Kristu oyow ogpakasuwoy kow porom.
mandalagit
hiabhiyab
Ko du-on ogpa-agad-agad to og-aku to ogpohimatayan to songo otow, sikan ka og-aku no og-sulì to usig.
Soini ka ignangon noy: ligkat to pogkamatoy ni Hisu Kristu, nighimu ka Magboboot to dalan oyow ogkohimu no ogpoul-ulioy on kandin ka goinawa to mgo otow kai to tano. No kono din on ogdoromdomon ka mgo salo dan. No nigsaligan koy rin oyow ignangonnangon noy ka soini no dalan no imbogoy rin to oyow ogpokogpo-ul-ulioy kid on to goinawa ta kandin.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Uromo ko ogkitoon now ka lunsud to Hirusalim no ogkalinglingotan on to mgo sundalu, sikan ian ka igpoitaga kaniu to magaan on ogkagugus ka soini no lunsud.
Ko tiglabung on, ogpakadoromdom sikandin to alunggun din ko nokoy na-an on bua ka ogkako-on dan kunto-on no mahapun.
Masakit ko’gkatu-tù.
No ka sikan no boi no nigkita nu, ian ka sikan no mabogbog no lunsud no ogboboot to tibo no mgo dakol no igbuyag kai to kalibutan.”
Nigsugu man do to tagtuun to pinamula no ubas ka duma no mgo suguonon din. Molmohon-ing pad ka nigsugu din to sikan no mgo nokohun-a. Di unawa ka nighimu ka mgo talagbantoy to pinamula to nighimu ran to mgo suguonon din no nokohun-a dio to kandan.
utun
lugak
Kono no tuud noy to ogboot to pogtuu now su nataga koy to nohogot on ka pogtuu now. Di ian goinawa noy atag ko ogpakabulig koy kaniu oyow ogkarago kow.
Gubaka nu ka sika kayu; botakan nu. Og-ayunon to ogpori.
Ko oggoram ki to lobag no warò pad nigbugsi, ogmasakit ka logoylogoy ta kai to la-ang.
tanò
pukow
sikad
kalimuan
Ka lituk to sug-ut, warad bali to sikan no kuddo su imbogoy rò to batò
“Nò, nig-uli on ka suguonon no nignangonan din ka igbuyag din to tibo no mgo intabak kandin. Sikan ian to nabolu lagboy ka igbuyag din no kagi rin to suguanon din to, ‘Agpas ka pa oghondio to mgo dalan, mgo bayaanan to mgo otow no dio to lunsud no angaya nu ka mgo otow no publi, mgo napoil, mgo nabutud, mgo napulid.’ ”
Ka anggam to balubatò, ian nakapako-id to anakon din su nigpa-asawa rin di warò pad goinawa to anakon din to to og-asawa.
limpot
Woy og-awoson to og-ay-ayaran to mgo boi ka pogpamminog dan to ig-anad kandan no kono ogkagikagi sikandan, woy og-awoson to duon goinawa ran to ogpaagad-agad to ig-anad kandan.
Ka mgo mandalagit, ian ngaran to mgo manukmanuk no ogmandawi to ogdalagit to piak, to mgo ulod, mgo ngalap to woig.
Ka napongaan on ka al-alukuyan to nalibulung no mgo otow, naboklas on ka nan-ulì on. Warad on otow.
“Ko duon otow no ogpamminog to ig-anad ku, di kono din ogtumanon, kono no sikoddi ka ogboboot kandan. Wara a nighondini to oyow ogboot to mgo otow kai to soin no kalibutan. Nighondini ad oyow ogkapangabangan ku ka mgo otow.
Ko ogkakamot on [ka bala-as], ogko-oti-an on no maroyow to homoy su ogmalambog.
Ka an-anayan no otow no si Adan, tano ka nigligkatan din. Ka mohuri no Adan no si Hisus, nigligkat to Langit.
tinawò
No ko oggoramon now ka kalamag no ogpuun to balabagan, ogpakakagi kow to, ‘ogmoinit lagboy angkuwan’ no songo ogkatuman ian,” kagi ni Hisus.
polak
ho-o
kasadkasad
burut
tu-ug to uak
Inogo on no duon nigdinog ku no ogkoiling to magulub to mohon-ing no mgo otow woy songo ogkoiling to pogdaragunut to dakol no sampow, woy ogkoiling dod to maagbot no balansì. No kagi ran to, “Ogsayoon ta ka Magboboot no ian ka Lagboy no Igbuyag woy Mamabogbog to tibo su og-alap sikandin to pandatuan din.
batili
Ogkounawa to waro ogkougpaan dan no ungod ogpakalohowlohow dio to mgo bubungan woy ko dio to mammara no tano. Mgo pilang woy ko mgo sinoropan ka hirogoanan dan. Waro tokora to mgo otow no waro nigtuu ko nokoy ka pulus to sikan mgo otow no nakalohowlohow.
Ogkoiniat a to ogdoromdomon now ka kagi no ingkasulat dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot woy ka insugu ni Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy talagpangabang kanta. No ka sikan, impanangon din kaniu to mgo suguanon din.
Nò, duon ka sagboka no otow dio to sikan no baloy no nanlobag ka paa rin woy ka bolad din,
“Agad hondoi no lunsud ka oghondian now, ko maroyow ka goinawa ran to ogpougpaan kow, agad nokoy ka ogpakoon kaniu, koona now.
Ko duon otow no ognangon to kagi no ogligkat kun to Gimukud to Magboboot, kono ta oglomotan,
Ka otow no ogbagkolong, og-atu to agad nokoy no udling.
il-il
Nigduma to mgo sundalu si Hisus dio to sikan no lama to dakol no baloy to gobirnador. Nigpalibulung dan dio ka tibo no duma no mgo sundalu.
Ko duon igkool-olog kanta to ogpakasalo, kono ta ogbayungan ka Magboboot to sikandin ka nigpasalo kanta su kono ogkoologan ka Magboboot to ogpakasalo woy songo kono din og-ol-ologan ka otow to pogpasalo.
Mataltahuroy ki tibo to pogpaas-asawooy ta no kono ta oghilaboti ka loin. Ian su ka Magboboot, oglogparan din ka sikan no otow no oghilabot to kono no asawa rin.
Pogkataga ni Hudas to nabobootan on naan si Hisus, nigsunditan din ka nighimu rin woy nighondio to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy to mgo tahuronon oyow ig-uli din ka sika katoluan no malison no salapi.
No nalugoy pad si Pedro to lunsud to Hupi, no dio nig–ugpo to baloy to songo otow no oghingaranan ki Simon no talaglinas to laplap to mgo ayam.
No ka sikan no mgo nigtuu on ki Hisu Kristu no nighun-a nammatoy, warad poron mapangabangi sikandan to kamatayon to waro katamanan.
linow
“Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku koykow. Ko balubato ka pad, nigpanagana kad no nighipanow kad on no sikoykow ka nigboot ko hondoi ka ogdolog. Di Usi, ko ubanon kad on, ogparoropoon kad no ogbanggutan ka to songo otow no og-alapon ka dio to kono nu ogkoiniatan porom.”
Sikan ian no nohimu kow on no ogpanag-ilingan to tibo no otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no taga Masidonia woy ka mgo taga Girisia,
“Nigpatokod ku sikoykow dio to mgo otow no pig-alam nu ligkat kai to soin no kalibutan no insalig nud koddi. Koykow ka tagtuun kandan dongan di insalig nu koddi. Nò, pigtuman dan ka innangon nu kandan.
Pogkapawo, ka mgo pogbuyagon, pigsugu dan ka mgo pulis dio to pirisuan tongod woy ki Pablo. Kagi to mgo pulis to, “Palibuwasa nud on kun ka sikan no mgo otow no napirisu gabii.”
Kò pad
Di ka koddi no ig-anad atag, kagi ni Hisus, ka lukos no tigbal do no ogpitow to boi no inat to igkoiniatan din no oghilabotan sikandin, sikan no lukos, nokopanlibug on sikandin dio to goinawa rin.
To si Pedro dio dod to lama. Nigdani kandin ka songo binulan no boi woy kagi rin kandin to, “Sikoykow songo duma ka ni Hisus no taga Galilia.”
Umayamon
potpot
lugò
Nangoni koy kuntoon ko nokoy ka pogdoromdom nu to soini. Og-inso koy tongod to Balaod ta ko ogkaayun ko ogbayaran ta rio ki Sisar ka igbuyag dio to Ruma ka buhis tanow woy ko kono?”
Nò, nigsamsam din ka sikaran to kinabo ni Hisus no sikan do ian no nigtigpok on ka langosa rin. Natagaan din on to noulian on ka dalu rin dio to diralom din.
lagat
Na-alindungan ka kanta no baloy to “library.”
dusilom
diwata
kunto-on
Songo nig-anad si Hisus to dangob no pananglitan no kagi rin to, “Ka Pogsusgu to Magboboot ian ogkounawa to otow no nigsawod to maroyow no boni dio to kamot din.
Ian nu dò nigkita so baoy.
Sikan ian, ko kono kow ogpakalagkos to ig-anad to Magboboot to tibo no anak din, kono kow naan no tu-tuu ian no anak su anak kow naan to dalan.
lu-ag
ulit
sugkip
No woig dod ka inhimatoy rin dongan to tibo no mgo otow kai to tano to pinougub din.
Nò, impohondio dan ki Hisus ka mgo hibatoon dan, duma to mgo sakup ni Hirodis. To nokouma on nigkagi ran to, “Maistru, nataga koy to ognangon ka to kamalogotan do woy songo malogot ka pog-anad nu to mgo otow bahin to pogtuman to Magboboot to mgo otow no kono ka ogkasasow ko loin ka goinawa to mgo otow. Ogbalagaron nu ro duon ka mgo otow agad ko dakol ka katondanan dan.
bulan
Di to nigkita rin ka otow no napalian, niglipasan din dò. Diò to limang to dalan nigbayò.
Tu-tuu ian to nakaliwan kow. Di ian to natamporan on ka mgo Hudiu su waro mogtuu. Di sikaniu, nakasumpul kow on atag su nigtuu kow on. Sikan ian, kono kow ogmarayandayan di ayad-ayad kow,
Nigpatangkoban to boi ka bo-bò din to tinurù to ma-ama rin.
Uyamuan a now.
Uromo to allow to ogbobootan to Magboboot ka tibo no mgo otow,” kagi ni Hisus, “Mohon-ing ka mgo otow no ogkagi to, ‘Buyag, nighingaranan noy ka koykow no ngaran ko nignangonnangon koy to kinagian to Magboboot woy pigpandogil noy ka mgo busow no nigsoloran to lawa to mgo otow, woy mohon-ing ka nighimu noy no kabolbolonganan.’
Ko nokoy ka igboot nu to duma nu, unawa rod ka igboot to Magboboot koykow. Ko songo monu ka dakol no igboot nu to duma nu, unawa rod ka dakol ka igboot to Magboboot koykow.”
Maniò to nigbayungan a nu to warò man salò ku.
Ko duon otow no ogtuu ki Hisus no ogkita to ogpakasalo ka duma rin no nigtuu, no ko ka salo to sikan no otow, kono no salo no kono ogkapasaylu, maroyow ko og-ampuan din ka sikan no otow no nakasalo no ogbogayan to Magboboot to pogkouyag din. Di duon salo no kono ogkapasaylu. Kono a ognangon kaniu to ig-ampu now ka sikan no otow no nakasalo to salo no kono ogkapasaylu.
tastas
Kagi to mgo otow kuwo ki Hisus, “Buyag, kanunoy koy bogayi to sikan igkouyag no paan.”
Manio naan to kono kow ogpakasabut to ogkagion ku? Kono kow ogpakasabut to kono now ogtinawoon ka koddi no ignangon.
Bali naan nigparagas nighutuk dio to Hirusalim woy si Hisus no ko nokouma on, nigsolod to Dakol no Ampuanan. Ko oghihipanow si Hisus dio, nigdalapak kandin ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad mgo talag-anad to Balaod dan woy ka mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu.
Pila buwa no allow no duon pagkoonan to mgo Hudiu no nighondio si Hisus to Hirusalim no og-amut.
Ka sikan no agot-ot no tanò, malalab woy mamikot. Oghimuon no mgo kuron.
kampilan
sungkalog
Nig-oopad sikandan to opparon ni Moisis no suguanon dongan to Magboboot woy ka opparon dod ni Hisus no oghingaranan to Nati no Karniru. No soini ka opparon dan: “Magboboot, sikoykow ka Lagboy no Igbuyag no ian ka Mamabogbog to tibo. Maroyow lagboy woy igkabolongbolong noy ka tibo no nighimu nu. Ligkat dongan, sikoykow ka Labow no Datu to tibo no mgo ugpaan. No matuwarong woy malogot ka mgo hinimuan nu.
Ko og-alam ka to otow no oghimuon nu poron no pogbuyagon to mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisus, kono ka ogkaragusu no ogtorong to bolad nu no og-ampu no ogbogoy to katondanan su oyow kono ka ogpakatapik to salo to songo otow. Og-awoson to ogdoyroyow ka oyow waro salo no ogpakatagu to goinawa nu.
Ka otow no du-on kamot din no homoy no ogpanlosut on, ogboluyan din ka ogkamot no iglingut din to igkamot din oyow konò oghondu-on ka babuy to kamot.
Ian to og-iling ki su ko taman to ogpokouma kid on dio ki Kristu, og-ungoron ta ro oghirosoni ka sikan no an-anayan no pogsalig ta kandin, ogpakarumaruma kinow kandin.
Nataga kow to nigbautismuan kinow on no igmaganangon to nasagboka kinow on ki Hisu Kristu. Woy nataga kow, ko namatoy on si Hisus, songo nalagkos kinow rod to pogkamatoy rin.
Ko du-on “meeting”, ogpokogtomutomu ka mgo otow no pakitkito-oy.
Ko konò kow ogtamong, pamanghò kow to ogkako-on
gawa
Nohoy-uan ni Hisus sikandin no nigtinawo no pigsamsam din ka otow no ibungon. Kagi ni Hisus kandin, “Koiniatan ku; ogkabawian kad on.”
Lipaka nu ka buku.
sawoy
Katustus ka pamanayon ta su kasukul ki to sakaru.
saksak
liwog
Sinosawod ta rò ko dakol ka bonì ta.
usig
Nò, ogkounawa rod kaniu. Og-awoson now to ogdoromdom to nalagkos kinow on to pogkamatoy ni Hisu Kristu no warad on labot ta ka poghimu to mgo maroot. Di duon on atag ka iam no pogkouyag ta no nigligkat ki Hisu Kristu. No og-awoson no ogkasayo ka Magboboot su ligkat to ogmaroyow on ka mgo batasan ta.
Si Noi dongan, ligkat to pogtuu rin to Magboboot, nigpamminog to mgo imbohog kandin ko nokoy ka ogkatuman no waro pad nigbunsud. Nigpaagad-agad no nighimu to dakol no arka oyow ogpokountud ka asawa rin, mgo anak din woy ka mgo asawa to mgo anak din oyow kono ogkallonod sikandan. Ligkat to kandin do no pogtuu, nabobootan ka tibo no waro nigtuu kai to kalibutan woy nigbogayan to Magboboot si Noi to sikan no naayun no goinawa rin dio to tangkaan din no ogligkat to pogtuu tanow kandin.
No, sikan do no magaan nigparuma to Gimukud to Magboboot si Hisus dio to holholawan.
balus
Kono no ka ogkoonon ta no ngalap ka ogpakarani kanta to tangkaan to Magboboot. Ian su waro pulus din ko ogkoon ki to ngalap, woy ko kono ta ro ogkoonon.
Mohon-ing pad porom ka igkabatbat noy kaniu tongod to sikan, di mohirap to ignangonnangon kaniu su makogal so ulu now, mananoy kow ogpakasabut.
Ko konò ogko-iniat ka kuddò no oghipanow, ungod ogbabanualoy ka ogtawalang ka oghipanow.
Nignangonan kud sikaniu nokani di songo ignangon noy rod kaniu no oghutuk. Ko duon agad hontow no ognangonnangon to loinloin no nangnangonon to sikan no maroyow no nangnangonon no nigtuuan now, ogkoumaan sikandan to igtungayow to Magboboot.
Nasingsing ka lobut ku
No, duon songo boi to sikan no lunsud no maroot ka oghimuon din. Nigdinog to dio ogkoon si Hisus to baloy to sikan no Parisiu. Sikan ian no nig-alap din dio ka taguanan no nohimu to kalasi no batu no oghingaranan to alabaster no naponu to ogkounawa to lana.
pugwak
pulid
upung
Taman to daruwa no tuid, nig–ugpo si Pablo dio to sikan no baloy no pigbayaran din to pog–ugpo, woy pinapanoik din on ka agad hontow, no ogpanumbaloy dio to kandin.
Nò. Pogmarani ran to sikan no bubungan to Olibu no ogkapantow to lunsud to Hirusalim, ka tibo no mgo sakup ni Hisus no nigluyudluyud kandin, nigbabansagon kandan to pogsayo dan to Magboboot bahin to tibo no mgo maroyow no hinimuan no nakitaan dan no impohimu to Magboboot ki Hisus.
Og-insò ko, “Hondo-i ka ko-onan kai?” No ogtu-onan ta to, “Diò to limang ka ko-onanan.”
sulì
Na-iaman to manta.
Di sikan no otow no ogsolod to gumawan, kandin ka talagbantoy to karniru.
bulus
Di duon allow no ogdakopon on ka lukos no ogpangasawa no warad sikandin dio to kandan no sikan ka allow no oglangkad to ogkoon sikandan.”
Ko duon duma now to pogtuu no ogpakasalo to dangob no duma now, og-inso a ko oglangub kow no ogpohusoy to otow no waro nigtuu ki Hisus? Manio to kono kow atag oghondio to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus oyow sikandan poron ka oghusoy kaniu?
Sikan ian, layun nu gongoni ka pogtuu nu woy paagad-agad ka to tibo no natagaan nu no tu-tuu ian su duon mgo otow no wa nigpaagad-agad to natagaan dan no tu-tuu ian. No ligkat to sikan, naraat on ka pogtuu ran poron.
Ko nigdinog ni Pilatu ka soin no imbayung dan, dakol on ka igkahallok din.
su og-awoson no waro otow dio to kaniu no ogpakanangonnangon to nigpasakup sikandin to kanak no ngaran ko nigpabautismu!
kaliawan
Ian to soini ka ignangon ku su oyow ogkasipod kow to soini no batasan now. Og-inso a ko waro agad sagboka no otow dio to kaniu no duon katouanan din no litos no oghusoy to mgo duma rin to pogtuu?
[Ka alimpulus], kalamag no ogkasaliu.
Nigkagi man do si Hisus to, “Ka Pogsugu to Magboboot, ogkounawa ian to soini. Duon bulawan no nalugoy no nabunbunan dio to songo kamot. To nakakita ka songo otow to soini, narago lagboy sikandin. Nò, inlobong din man do no nig-uli dio to baloy rin woy imbaligya din ka tibo no kalaglagan din. Nokoy pad no, niglibong dio no pigboli rin ka sikan no kamot to sikan no salapi no imbayad to kalaglagan din.”
tabalò
Ka tanò, nangotulkotul su moon-ing bubungan.
Kono no litos no igsolod ta ka mgo inotow-otow dio to Baloy to Magboboot. Songo kono no litos ko igsolod ta kai to goinawa ta su nohimu kid on no baloy to Magboboot. Ka sikan, nounawa rod to kinagian to Magboboot no impasulat din dongan. Kagi rin to, “Og-uugpo a dio to taliwaro dan woy ogdurumaruma a kandan. Ogkohimu ad on no Magboboot dan no sikandan ka ogkohimu on no mgo otow ku.”
Nighutuk nig-inso si Hisus kandin to, “Simon, anak ni Huan, duon goinawa nu koddi?”Kagi ni Simon, “Hoo man naan, Buyag. Nataga ka to duon goinawa ku koykow.”Kagi ni Hisus, “Bantayi nu ka koddi no mgo karniru.”
diù
tolom
No nigdulug ka igbuyag to sundalu dio ki Pablo no pigdakop din on. Nigpabanggutan din on si Pablo to daruwa no karina. Pogkaponga, nig–inso ka kapitan ko hontow ka ngaran din woy ko nokoy ka salo din.
Di og-awoson to ogsagmanon din ka mgo magaliug din woy to ogkoiniatan din no ogbulig to duma no mgo otow woy to oyow maroyow ka goinawa rin. Woy og-awoson to oghimuon din ka maroyow ro woy og-unug ka goinawa rin to Magboboot, woy to ogponoron din ka koiniatan to lawa rin no kono no litos.
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, agad kon-u, ogbuligan ta ka agad hontow di og-awoson ta lagboy no ogbuligan ta ka mgo duma ta no nigtuu.
No ka mgo otow no tahan no nigtuuran to Magboboot to oyow og-unug sikandan ki Hisus, nigpatuu rin on ki Hisus. No ka mgo otow no nigtuu on ki Hisus, nighimu on to Magboboot no maroyow dio to tangkaan din. Woy ogtalaran din to karoyawon no ogkouyag on sikandan to waro katamanan.
“Wara a mogkagi bahin kaniu tibo. Nataga a man to goinawa to tibo no pig-alam kud. Di og-awos to ogkatuman pad ka inkasulat to Magboboot dio to Tahan no Kasulatan. Kagi, ‘Duon sagboka no lukos no malasi og-amut to ogkoon no nig-usigon a rin.’ Soini ka kagi to Tahan no Kasulatan.”
Nigdinog ka sikan no darua no sakup ni Huan to kagi rin. Nò, pigluyud dan on si Hisus.
Nò, natokow no nigkita ran si Moisis woy si Elias no nig-al-alukuyoy ki Hisus.
Pogkouma on to allow no innangon to ogpalimud ka mgo otow to tangkaan ki Hirodis, nig–ilis on sikandin to maroyow no manggad no ian ilisanon to labow no igbuyag. No nigpinpinnuu on si Hirodis to pinnuanan din to pandatuan. Woy malayat ka innangonnangon din to sikan no mgo otow no nalimud.
singow
Ka soini no innangon ku, kono no igsugu ku kaniu oyow ogpakabogoy kow. Di impohitaga ku ro sikaniu to nighimu to duma now no moingos no dio to songo ugpaan. Ian su oyow ko ogkoilingan now sikandan, ian ka ogpakamalogot to igdakoli now ian ka mgo nigtuu kai to goinawa now.
Doromdomi a rò.
himulung
tubow
bo-ugan
lamat
Ogkagi rin to ogkara-at ka homoy rin su konò ogko-ubus no oghilamonon.
Og-itis ki to woig ko og-inum ki.
harok
No si Maria, nig-alap din ka songo kalasi no ogkounawa to lana no oghingaranan to naldu. Nò, nigbus-ugan din ka paa ni Hisus no ka bulbul din no malayat ka igtarapu rin to paa rin. Mahal lagboy ka imbus-ug din no subla to songo salmonan no nigsokol dio to baloy ka ngarog to mohomut.
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, ogbuyu a kaniu to oyow kono ogkounus ka goinawa now to duon dod soini no igkabaybayari ku kai to pirisuan no ogligkat to pog-anad ku kaniu tongod ki Hisus. Ian su ka igkabaybayari ku, ogpakabulig kaniu.
Waro do malugoy, mgo tatolu buwa no uras, no nigsundul on ka asawa ni Ananias. Di waro mataga ko noomonu ka asawa rin.
Ka otow no nabutud no nigtambalan ni Hisus no nakakita on sikandin, no-iling to kabolbolonganan su nigpamulingan ni Hisus.
dalom
Titimbang to bakalow.
Maga-an ki og-ulì su ogkatangkob on ka allow.
Ka sikan no allow no ogbobootan to Magboboot ka mgo otow, songo ogpakasasindog on ka dongan no mgo taga Ninibi woy songo oghabian dan sikaniu su to pogkarinog dan to innangon ni Hunas kandan, nigpan-ongkoran dan ka mgo maroot no batasan dan. No kuntoon duon on kai to kaniu ka labow pad lagboy ki Hunas di waro kow mogtuu ka innangon din kaniu.”
Ko duon lunsud no kono ogpalopow kaniu woy kono ogpamminog to ignangon now kandan, ongkori now ka sika no ugpaan woy topungi now ka basak dut paa now no sikan ian ka indanan no warad on labot now to sikan no lunsud ko oglogparan uromo sikandan to Magboboot.
Ka tuud ku to soini no igpasapad ku kandan su og-awoson no ogdakolon dan ka goinawa to duma ran no ogligkat to maawang no goinawa ran woy to waro salo dan to Magboboot, woy ogligkat dod to pogtuu ran no kono oglimanglimang.
Kai ka su ogpamminog a to gotok nu ko maniò to og-o-oguk ka gotok nu. Du-on bua biak nu.
kagow
Ka sikan no mgo otow, kono oggongon to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Kristu. Sikandin ka ogkounawa to ulu su ian ogpakaboot kanta no nohimu on no lawa rin. Woy sikandin dod ka ogpakamanokal to pogtuu ta. No ian ogkounawaan ka pogtulin to soini no lawa ta no duon mgo ugat no ogpakatongos to mgo bokog oyow ogmanokal woy to oyow kono ogkagulak. No ka pogtulin din, ogligkat to Magboboot.
tumbow
manuk
balabawan
topak
Konò og-ulung-ulung no batò.
Ka Magboboot ka ogligkatan to tibo no maroyow woy waro solug no maroot no ogpakaamut to agad nokoy no igbogoy rin kanta. Sikandin ka Amoy ta no nighimu to tibo no oglayag dio to langit. Ka layag dan, ogkahalinhalin no duon alung ligkat to pogkahalin dan. Di ka Magboboot, kono ogkoiling kandan su kono atag ogkahalin.
Di nigkagi ka diwata to, “Sakarias, ko ka ogkahallok koddi. Nigdinog to Magboboot ka in-ampu nu, no ka asawa nu no si Elisabit, og-anak to lukos. Si Huan ka ighingaran nu.
Kagi pa ni Hisus, “Ko duon sagboka no uripon, kono ogkoimu to darua ka tagtuun kandin su kono din ogkaayunan to ogpokogdonganon to ogtuman to darua. Ka sika sagboka, dakol so goinawa rin kandin di ogsamilian din ka sikan no dangob. Ogtahuron din ka sagboka di kono din amana ogsagman ka dangob. Songo unawa,” kagi ni Hisus, “ko rio now isabuk to goinawa now ka mgo igkaratu now, songo kono ogkaayun no songo isabuk ka Magboboot to goinawa now.”
Aligbat a no batò a, taan ad on ka nig-ugpò kai to Mansalinow.
No kono no sikan do di to pogdoromdom ku, agad nokoy, warad on pulus ku no loin su oyow ogkatagam a ki Hisu Kristu no Lagboy no Igbuyag ku, no ian on ka duon dakol lagboy no pulus ku. Sikan ian to nig-iniugan ku ro ka tibo no napulusan ku poron nokani. No to pogdoromdom ku, ogkounawa ro to lagut su oyow ogkapurut kud on si Kristu
Wà noy matagoi.
No sikanta no mgo lukos, tongod to pog-ugpo ta to asawa ta, songo og-awoson ta no layun ta ogsumsumanon ko nokoy ka og-awoson to mgo asawa ta. Woy og-awoson to duon igbogoy ta kandan no pogtahud su manmanokal ki kandan woy songo nabogayan sikandan to kouyagan no waro katamanan. No ian to og-awoson to soini ka oghimuon ta oyow ogpamminogan kinow to Magboboot ko og-ampu ki.
Songo sikan dod ian ka kaniu. Ko ogpakatuman kow on to tibo no insugu to Magboboot kaniu, songo kagi kow ro to, ‘kono koy on no litos no ogsayoon su ian noy ro nigtuman ka insugu kanami.’ ”
sikat
Nigtabak kandan kuwo ki Hisus. Kagi ran, “Si Abraham ka kanami no amoy.” Kagi ni Hisus, “Ko malogot pa porom no anak kow ni Abraham, songo oghimuon now porom ka pighimu ni Abraham.
Pigduma to Gimukud to Magboboot si Hisus dio to holholawan oyow og-ol-ologan ni Satanas no igbuyag to mgo busow oyow ogpakasalo porom si Hisus.
Ko mapawo on, niglibong si Hisus dio to Dakol no Ampuanan dio to Hirusalim. Nalimuran to mgo otow sikandin no nigpinnuu si Hisus woy nig-anad kandan.
anoow
Ogkatiluk ki to maagsil.
Ogti-awon ko’gmatalò
Ko nakabayò ka gakit to mababow, ka balagon no ingu-os, natobtob woy natampod to batu
sonob
kolop
Sikan ian to ogbuyu a kaniu to igpatokod now no oghutuk to dakol dod ian ka goinawa now kandin.
porom
ugtu
basa
Nig-abin a to sikan no otow; naan din no hari a rin.
Nò, nakakita on woy nigduma on ki Hisus. Ungod din on sayaa ka Magboboot, no ka tibo no mgo otow, pogpitow ran to nabutud no nabawian on, songo nigsayo on sikandan tibo to Magboboot.
Ogtulion ta ka bato to Allow ta to Oghimoloy oyow to pogtuman ta ka sikan no sagboka no sugu ni Moisis. Ko sikan ian ka kaniu no oghimu ko Allow ta to Oghimoloy, manio naan to ogkabolu kow koddi to nigbawian kud ka sagboka no otow to Allow ta to Oghimoloy?
Kagi to dangob no mgo otow no marani ki Pablo to, “Manio to ogmarooton nu ka Labow no Talagpanubad no pig–alam to Magboboot?”
sinlaksinlak
Ka otow no ogkokombul, dakol ka ogkomo-on din no ko-onon no igsungit din.
bali-ag
Ko ogsokoron ta, ogpitawon ta ko hontow ka ogmatikang ko oglangkotow.
Warò a makaponod to igkabolù ku to sikan no otow.
balintus
Tuguon ka to malaab
bitil
No omunaan to imbogoy rin ka soini no mgo katouanan su og-awoson to oyow, tibo kinow no ogtuu ki Kristu, duon on ka og-awoson ta to oyow ogkohimu ta ka tibo no igpatuman to Magboboot kanta. Woy og-awoson tanow oyow ogkohogot ka pogtuu ta kandin no nohimu on no lawa ni Hisus,
Nò, ka sikan no Balaod ni Moisis dongan, noiling do to alung su tigbal do nokog-iling to sikan no ogpokouma no madmaroyow no ian tu-tuu uromo. Sikan ian, to tibo no tuid, ka sikan no ogsimba, ungod oghutukhutuk to pogtubad dan to mgo ayam no igtuman to sikan no Balaod. Di ka sikan waro lagboy makaayun kandan to Magboboot.
Og-usigon kow to tibo no mgo otow su sakup ku sikaniu. Di sika otow no ogpakaaguanta taman to ogkaponga ka sikan no igkabaybayari now, ogkabogayan sikandin to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
No ian su songo noiniat din to oyow sikanta no ogkohoy-uan din, ogkatagaan ta ka dakol no karoyawon din no igbogoy rin kanta su impanagana kinow rin to oyow uromo, ogkouyag kinow on to waro katamanan.
Ko nokoy ka pog-ugpo to tag sagboka kanta no naabin kinow on to Magboboot, ogtumanon ta ro ka impohimu rin kanta. Kono kid oghalinhalin. Sikan ka ig-anad ku to tibo no mgo nigtuu dio to agad hondoi no limuranan dan.
Ka kalu-agi to lawa to kamulung, marani to songo pulgara.
Ko oglapas ki, ko konò ki ogpakabatuk to mababow su mabolbol ka woig, ogka-alus ki diò to maralom.
Di kuntoon to soini no mohurian no allow, ka Anak din ka impohitaga kanta to kinagian to Magboboot. Ka soini no Anak din ka nigpohimu to Magboboot to soini no kalibutan, no si Hisus dod ka nig-alam din woy nigbootan din to oyow ian on tagtuun to tibo.
dayuan
ubat
Nataga kow to ian inhondii ni Hisus to tano su oyow ogkaawo din ka salo to mgo otow woy nataga kow to waro maroot dio to goinawa rin.
Kaddoson ka ti-om.
Nigparagas nig-anad si Hisus to mgo otow bahin to kagi to Magboboot no mohon-ing no mgo pananglitan no ogkounawa to soini ka ig-anad din. Di ian din ignangon ka litos to kasabutan dan do. Ko warad makasabut, nighagtong on nig-anad.
Waro katamanan to sikan no poglogpad din kandan no konad on ogpakaamut sikandan to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no ogkaatangan on sikandan to karoyawon no ogligkat to kabogbogan din.
panagaal
tigbal dò
Ogpakatamà ka lagot to kayu no dugu-an.
Sikan ka ognangonan ku sikaniu to balagara now on ka soini no mgo otow. Do kow ogsasow su ko ligkat to doromdom to mgo otow ka soini no oghimuon dan, ogka-awo do ka ig–anad dan.
bugan
pangabaga
Nataga ki tongod to mgo otow no nohimu on no mgo anak to Magboboot, to kono dan ogparagason ka mgo salo dan. Ian su si Hisus no ian Anak to Magboboot ka ogkannugun kanta oyow kono ogpakatood si Satanas no oggongon kanta.
Pogkarinog ni Pedro to kagi ni Hisus, nignangon sikandin to, “Agad og-ongkoran to tibo no mgo duma ku, sikoddi atag, kona a og-ongkod koykow.”
silab
Ko nallantoy on ka mgo otow nigsugu ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din. Kagi rin, “Pamuruta now ka mgo lotibon oyow kono ogkaraat agad to molintok.”
Duon otow no nokouma dio to lunsud to Episu no si Apulus. Hudiu sikandin no dio mootow to lunsud to Alihandria. Lagboy ogkatou si Apulus to ognangonnangon woy lagboy naanad to kinagian to Magboboot no duon to Tahan no Kasulatan.
alag
Woy ka tagsaboka kandan nalantoy. Duon pad sampulu woy darua no bukag no nasamo no nigpamurut to mgo hibatoon.
Waro mogtawad si Abraham to sikan no innangon to Magboboot kandin. Di nasi natimulan do ian atag ka pogtuu rin woy nigsayo din ka Magboboot.
Duon buwa songo otow no ogkagi to, “Sikoykow, duon kun pogtuu nu ki Hisus, di sikanak, duon oghimuon ku.” Ian ka kagi ran di soini ka igtabak ku kandan: papitawa a kun to duon pogtuu nu ko waro ogpakalagkos no oghimuon nu. Di ogkabatukan atag ka kanak no pogtuu su ligkat to mgo maroyow no oghimuon ku.
Nigdatong on si Hisus duma to mgo hibatoon din dio to doipag to lanow to Galilia no dio to sikan no ugpaan nighingaranan dan to Gadara.
Kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandin, “Ogkootawan pad ka maama nu.”
Si Pedro, wa mogsolod; dio do to limang to gumawan nig-ugpo. Nò, ka sikan no hibatoon ni Hisus no ogtokoron to sikan no Igbuyag, niglibong dio to gumawan. Nigkagian din ka boi dio no talagbantoy to gumawan woy impasolod din si Pedro.
pannikuwoy
No ka sikan no mgo otow no og-anad to ubat no mgo nangnangonon, ogpamminogan to mgo otow no waro mogtuu ki Hisus no kai to soini no kalibutan. Ian su ka batasan to sikan no mgo talag-anad, songo og-unug dod to mgo batasan to soini no kalibutan no kono ogkoiniatan to Magboboot. Sikan ian ka ogkatagaan ta ka mgo nangnangonon dan to kai ro duon ogligkat to soini no kalibutan.
Ko niglingi si Hisus to mgo hibatoon din, nigkagi to, “Mohirap ian to mgo otow no datu oyow ogpasakup to Pogsugu to Magboboot.”
Nigsugu din ka dangob no suguanon din to, ‘Kua now ka sika songo libu dio to kandin, woy ibogoy nu to sika suguanon no duon sampulu no libu,
halhal
langkap
“Sikan ian ka ogtokoron to tibo no mgo otow to hibatoon ku sikaniu ko ogmarakdakoli kow to goinawa now.”
bingas
Sikan ian to kono ki oghimu to waro pulus. Di og-awoson to ogpoomot ki to og-anad to oyow ogkatagaan tad ko nokoy ka ogkoiniatan to Magboboot no oghimuon ta.
No ian to nohimu a no suguanon ni Hisu Kristu su oyow ignangonnangon ku ka soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon. No ligkat dod to soini no nangnangonon, napirisu ad on. Sikan ian mgo sulod, ampui a now ro to oyow kono a ogkahallok to ognangonnangon to soini no nangnangonon su sikan ian ka katondanan no imbogoy to Magboboot kanak.
Tu-tuu ian ka soini no kagi, Ko nakalagkos kinow ki Hisus to pogkamatoy rin songo ogkabogayan ki to kouyagan ta no og-ugpo ki dio to kandin.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Agad naan, malogot ka kagi ku su nataga a man to ogligkatan ku woy ka ogdatongan ku. Di sikaniu atag, waro kow mataga ka ogligkatan ku woy ka ogdatongan ku.
Sikandin ka Amoy to tibo no kai to tano woy ka dio to Langit, no ian ogkohingaran to Magboboot no kapunganan din.
Ogtimpa ko’ghibat
agod-od
Ko nigkamotan on an-anayan no nigtubù man dò, no kalugoy, nabuyag on ka mgo kayu no nigpulalas on.
Nigtabak to, “Og-awoson to Igbuyag noy.”
Sikandan, nigsuwoy on to tu-tuu ian no tinuuan su nahan dan no napongaan on ka pogkouyag ta ko nigtuu kid on ki Hisus, no warad kun on uromo pogkouyag ta ligkat to kamatayon ta. Ligkat to sikan, duon on mgo otow no namminog kandan no nakasuwoy on to pogtuu ran.
Ka nigpurut ku to bokbok no nigbudbud ku diò, no nigkatkat ku.
Nigpoinum dan si Hisus to inumanon no in-amut dan to mapoit no tambal. Di to nignanam ni Hisus soini, warad on sikandin nigparagas no nig-inum.
Ka du-on nalonod diò to “pool”, moon-ing kandan ka namataan no warò nakapangabang. Natonongan no warò nokowo-il.
Nigbayo dio ka duma no mgo Parisiu woy ka duma no talag-anad to Balaod. Nigmugongmugong sikandan no inso dan to mgo hibatoon ni Hisus to, “Manio to og-amut kow no ogkoon woy og-inum to mgo makasasalo woy ka mgo talagkubla to buhis?”
Di uromo no ogpakasasindog sikandan dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, ogpakanangonnangon sikandan to mgo batasan dan no maroot. Tahan on nigpanagana ka Magboboot to ogpamootan din on uromo ka mgo otow ko manokal pad woy ko namatoy on tongod to mgo batasan dan no kai pad to tano.
lambotug
“Duon ka otow no nighondio to kamot din su ogsawod to boni. Pogsawod din, duon boni no nakasawod dio to dalan. Ka sikan no boni, nariokan do ka duma woy pan-ulibon on to mgo manukmanuk ka duma.
balagoy
sunlalan
polod
Sikan ian to og-awoson to oghogoton ta ka pogtuu ta, no kono tad oglokaan su si Hisu Kristu ka mabogbog woy ian Labow to mgo Talagpanubad kanta dio to tangkaan to Magboboot. Sikandin dod ka Anak to Magboboot no diad og-ugpo to Langit dio to tangkaan to Amoy rin.
Ian to oyow kono ogsilag ka mgo igsumpul to lawa ta di ogmabulbuligoy ro.
Sikan ian to ogparumoon porom ni Pablo si Timoteo oyow ogbulig kandan. Di su nataga ka tibo no mgo Hudiu, to Girigu ka amoy rin, natagaan dan to waro din ipatuli si Timoteo no igtuman to batasan to mgo Hudiu. No sikan ian to nigtuli ni Pablo si Timoteo oyow ogpakaamut to mgo Hudiu dio to ogkabayaan dan.
Si Pilatu no gobirnador, nighutuk nig-inso kandan kagi, “Hontow to soin no darua ka ogkoiniatan now no ogpalibuwason ku?” Nigtabak sikandan to, “Si Barabas.”
dugsunan
Nokani, sikaniu, namariu kow pad to Magboboot. Di kuntoon, su nasagboka kow on ki Hisu Kristu, nakamarani kow on kandin su ligkat to langosa ni Kristu no nigpakimatoy kanta.
Sikan ian to ignangon ku kaniu to koon kow su oyow ogmanokal kow on su waro ogkoumonu kanta tibo.”
Ka otow no nabulog ka mata rin konad on ogkabulat ka mata rin.
No pigtinawo ni Hisus ka ibungon no pigdampo din ka lawa rin. Kagi ni Hisus to, “Ogkoiniatan ku ian no ogkabawian kad on.” Nò, naawo on ka mgo kogang dio to lawa to sikan so ibungon.
Ko rio pad si Hisus to sikan no baloy, nokouma on ka inoy rin woy ka mgo hari rin. Dio to libuwasan nigsasindog di impaalap dan ka kagi ran dio to kandin oyow ogkagian dan porom sikandin.
Ka tibo no mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu, allow-allow ogtuman to katondanan dan no ogkohutukhutuk ka sikan dod no pogtubad dan to mgo ayam. Di kono man ogpakaawo to mgo salo.
Di sikanta no nigtuu ki Hisus, ogkoiling ki to kapunganan ni Sara no ian ka nokohun-a no asawa ni Abraham no kono no uripon.
Sikan ian to si Hisus ka immalogot to sikan no iam no sabut to Magboboot oyow ka mgo otow no nig-abin din no sakup, ogkabogayan to sikan no karoyawan no waro katamanan no innangon din. Ian su ka pogkamatoy ni Hisus ka igbalukas to salo to mgo otow su niglop-ang dan ka mgo Balaod to sikan no an-anayan no sabut to Magboboot.
Nig-inso ka mgo otow, “Nighondoid naan si Hisus kuntoon?” Nigtabak ka nabawian to, “Wa kud matagoi ko hondoid on.”
Nò, ko ogkabuhi on ka mgo nammatoy, hontow ka asawa to soini no nabalu no boi su tibo sikandan nig-asawa kandin?”
Di ogkoiniatan ku to ogpakasabut kow to, ka mgo lukos, ogpaagad-agad ki Kristu. Ka mgo boi, ogpaagad-agad to asawa rin no lukos, no si Kristu, ogpaagad-agad to Magboboot no Amoy rin.
Igpanu-on ta angkuan ka manuk.
tongik
Kagi to mgo hibatoon din, “Di Buyag, ko nohirogo do maroyow; ogkoulian do ka dalu rin.”
Natagaan ni Hisus ko nokoy ka kagi ran. Kagi ni Hisus to, “Manio no ogmakagkagioy kow bahin to waro paan? Doisok naan ka pogtuu now to Magboboot.
Manio to kono ogmamasakit ka goinawa now to mgo salo now? Sinsinogow kow on woy pandawot kow to sikan no mgo salo now. Kono kow on ogngingisi di ungod kow ro ogsinsinogow. Maroyow ko kono kow ogkarago; sonditi now on ka goinawa now.
tibulus
No kono no sikan do ka ogpakabulig kanta di songo ogbuligan kinow to Gimukud to Magboboot ko duon ka waro tanow matoui, su waro ki mataga ko nokoy ka litos no ogbuyuon ta ko og-ampu ki, di ka Gimukud to Magboboot ka ogtangko to Magboboot no sikandin ka ogbulig kanta no igpohitaga rin to Magboboot ko nokoy ka dii to goinawa ta ko kono kid ogkatou no oglituk.
igì
Woy nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Malogot ka soini no ogkagion ku kaniu. Ko ogtuu kow to Magboboot no kono kow ogtambabo, songo ogpokohimu now ka nighimu ku to soin no kayu no igira. Woy kono no soini do. Ko ogsuguon now ka soin no bubungan to oyow oghalin dio to dagat, ogkatuman ian.
Ko banta-an to tagtu-un to kamot no ogpabuligan din to moon-ing no mgo otow oyow mgo tatolu no allow ogko-ubusan on to ogga-ani.
To magaan on ogsalop ka allow, nigdani kandin ka mgo hibatoon din no kagi ran to, “Magaan on ogsalop ka allow no waro marani no lunsud. Pohipanawa nud on ka mgo otow dio to marani no mgo lunsud mgo hilit oyow ogpakaboli pad to koonon dan.”
Ko pigkinabaan pa to Magboboot ka dorounan dio to lati no ogkabuhi kuntoon di asolom ogkagangu ro woy ogsilaban soini, agad sikaniu no mgo otow ogbogayan kow rin to litos no ilis now. Amana no doisok do ka pogsalig now!
sasindog
Agad si Simon no ka bailan, songo nigtuu on ki Hisus woy songo nigpabautismu on to woig. Pogkaponga, nigluyud on ki Pilipi. Pogpitow ni Simon to oghimuon ni Pilipi no mabogbog no mgo kabolongbolonganan woy to mgo indanan no igmalogot to kinagian to Magboboot, noinuinu sikandin lagboy.
Ogti-angon to boi ka sakoru rin.
Ka inagkud, ogpokogsolug ka agoloy to homoy no ogkoimu no agkud.
lig-ot
Soini ka ig-udling ku to mgo dalaga, mgo balubato woy ka mgo balu no boi. Madmaroyow poron ian ko og-iling kow kanak to kono kow ro ogpangasawa.
ogbogayan ka sikan no otow, to dakol kuntoon. Ogbogayan sikandin to Magboboot agad pila no mgo baloy, mgo hari, mgo kakoy, mgo inoy mgo anak woy tano. Tagkos to soini duon igkabaybayari rin. Di uromo atag ogkobuhi ka sika otow no waro katamanan dio to Magboboot.
karoga
Nakalikù.
utu-utu
No kuntoon, pighitaga kinow rin to soini no ingkohoy-u rin kanta ko nootow si Hisu Kristu kai to soini no kalibutan no ian Talagpangabang kanta. No pigdoog ni Hisus ka pogboot to pogkamatoy ta. Woy nigpohitaga kinow rin, ligkat to sikan no maroyow no nangnangonon, to ogbogayan kinow on to kouyagan no waro katamanan dio to kandin.
otisò
solib
To nigkita ka duma no mgo Parisiu to soini, nig-inso dan ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus to, “Manio naan to og-amut ogkoon ka igbuyag now to mgo talagkubla to buhis woy to mgo makasasalo?”
Ko igdogpak nu to lagut, ighatod nu dio to tagu-anan.
Songo apul dò ian ka so-i otow no konò no litos ka apul din.
Nigparani ni Hisus ka mgo otow woy nigkagian din sikandan. Kagi rin, “Pamminog kow to kagi ku. Tibo kow pamminog oyow ogpakasabut kow.
Ka an-anayan to sikan no hop-at, ogkoiling to liun. Ka dangob, ogkoiling to lukosan no baka. No ka igkatolu, duon langlanguwan din no ogkoiling to langlanguwan to otow. No ka igkohop-at, ogkoiling to kuligi no oglayanglayang.
“Ka otow no ogtinawo kaniu, songo ogtinawoon a rin. Woy ka otow no ogtinawo koddi, songo ogtinawoon din ka Amoy ku no dio to langit no nigsugu koddi kai to kalibutan.
Ko warò pad bulasi to taloy-u, dakol ka goinawa rin to sikan no lukos woy dakol ka ingkaragò din.
tigpos
Ko ogkagi ka ubun-ubun, ogkagi to bagu-bù, huun, huun, huun.
No ko diad on si Pistu, nanhondio kandin ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy ka mgo pogbuyagon to mgo Hudiu no pighutukan dan bayungi si Pablo. Woy nigbuyu dan ki Pistu to,
Nig-ula-an ku ka agoloy; maro-ot.
No sikandin, ungod niggogongon ki Pedro woy ki Huan su ogkarago. No ka tibo no mgo otow dio to sikan no ampuanan, nammallaguy on no ogdalapak kandan dio to holonganan to mgo otow no oghingaranan dan to Balukon ni Solomon su nabolongbolong lagboy.
Koddi no Kakoy to mgo koot-otawan kai to kalibutan, nighondini ad to tano to oyow ogpamanghoon ku ka mgo otow no nalagak su oyow ogkalipuwasan ku sikandan oyow ogkaawo ka mgo salo dan.”
buì
dongkig
To nokouma ka mgo Hudiu dio ki Hisus, nigpohoy-uhoy-u kandan no kagi ran, “Maroyow lagboy ka sikan no kapitan no nigsugu kanami.
Nò, ka mgo otow no talagbantoy to sikan no mgo babuy, nigmallaguy sikandan pohondio to lunsud. Nignangonan dan ka mgo otow to nakitaan dan bahin to noumaan ka mgo lukos no pigbusawan.
Nighalop on ka pogpitow ta; konò ta ogkamologmologan ka nigsulat.
Ko ogkabuyag ka otow, ogkoyuyung on su ogkapokù woy ogmalotoy ka oghihipanow.
kalù
Duon ka mgo otow dio no kagi ran ki Hisus to, “Ka batasan to mgo hibatoon ni Huan ko ogtuud to og-ampu to Magboboot, malasi oglangkad ogkoon. Songo ogkounawa rod ka batasan to mgo Parisiu. Di ka koykow no mgo hibatoon, ogkoon atag woy og-inum dod.”
Soini no Maria, ian ka boi no nigbus-ug to mohomut no agua dio to paa ni Hisus woy nigtarapuan din to bulbul din. Ka kandin no maama no si Lasaru ka nigdaralu.
turù
Kono no ka kalaglagan do ka ogkabaybayaran ka ogpakatagad, di agad sikanta, ogpakaalooy kinow ka nigbogayan to Gimukud to Magboboot. No sikandin ka inhun-a rin imbogoy kanta no igmaganangon to duon dod karoyawon no igbogoy rin kanta uromo. Ogdalong ki to duma no nighimu to Magboboot no ogpakatagad, su oglayun ki og-iman-iman to sikan no allow no ogpatokod ka Magboboot to nohimu kinow on ian no anak din. Woy og-iamon din on ka lawa ta ko ogkouyag kinow on to waro katamanan.
singow
gusong
limpung
su ka otow no tahan no nouripon no nigtuu on ki Hisus, ogkounawa to waro nouripon dio to tangkaan to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. Di ka otow no tahan no waro nouyamu to songo otow ka nigtuu on ki Kristu, songo nounawa to nouyamu on ni Kristu sikandin.
Pamminog kow,” kagi ni Hisus, “Duon mgo otow kuntoon no nahan ta no ogpokohun-a kandan porom ogpasakup to Pogsugu to Magboboot, dokad di kandan ka ogkamohuri no ogpasakup. Duon dod mgo otow no nahan ta no mohuri on ogpasakup to Pogsugu to Magboboot, dokad di mohon-ing sikandan ka oghun-a ogpasakup to Pogsugu to Magboboot.”
No to doisok do, ka katondanan no imbogoy nu kandin, mamalintok pad to sikan no katondanan no imbogoy nu to mgo diwata no suguanon nu. Woy nigbogayan nu sikandin to karoyawan woy ka pogtahud no litos to igkasayo noy to dakol no igbuyag.
Kagi ni Hisus, “To allow on to ogbobootan to Magboboot ka mgo otow, mamolintok pad ka iglogpad din to mgo taga Tiru woy mgo taga Sidon to iglogpad din kaniu no mgo taga Korasin woy taga Bitsaida.”
Ko rio to Dakol no Ampuanan dan, ogpamitawon dan si Hisus no nigpoin-insooy, “Nokoy ka koykow no goinawa ko ogsolod to pagkoonan si Hisus woy ko kono?”
ungod
lusob-ong
Di ka mgo otow no nataguan on to Gimukud to Magboboot, ogkataga sikandan ko nokoy ka pulus to agad nokoy. Di, ka mgo otow no waro nigtuu, kono ogpakasabut to mgo doromdom to mgo otow no nigtuu.
Diò to Maambago du-on ka nigpo-orok to agoloy.
No duon nigdinog ku no lagong no nigligkat dio to taliwaro to sikan no hop-at no hinimu. Kagi rin to, “Ka igkabayad to songo allow to pogtalabau, ogkalitos to tatolu ro no supa no bogas woy ko songo gantang woy tonga no ginaling. Di kono now hilaboti ka mantika woy ka inumanon.”
la-ang
Du-on otow no warò polak, konò ogpakalituk to ogkagi sikandin no no-iling to no-omaw.
Nò, nohutuk mohoy-u si Hisus. Nighondio to sabalanan din no pilang no inlokob dan ka dakol no batu.
Umba ognokalnokal so bu-aya
Nig-u-unug to batasan dan
Nò man.
Ko ogbakosan noy, ogbogoy noy to manggad no og-indan noy to ogbakos to bakotin.
Dokad di, duon dod soini no batasan now no kono ku ogkoiniatan. Ian su ka goinawa now kanak woy to mgo duma now, konad on ogkounawa karakol to sikan no goinawa now nokani to kabinunsuran to pogtuu now.
Ogtutuyun ka ogkanu-nù ka manuk
Nig-uglingan dò ka atoboy din to “Kai ka.”
Niglingi-lingi si Hisus no ogpitow to mgo otow no kagi rin kuwo to noumil to, “Kotonga nu ka bolad nu.” Inkotong din on no nabawian on.
Susì ian igtakow to ubal.
Ko du-on dod ka inoy to baloy, warò pad iggalat to anak din di litos to ogpatantanuran ka batò ko ogbuohon to kakoy su nigpanlaba ka inoy. Du-on dò ian to marani to baloy no ogdinogon din dò ka batò ko ogsinogow.
Nò, nig-ongkoran to boi ka igsakaru rin no nig-uli dio to lunsud. Kagi rin kuwo to mgo otow dio to lunsud,
Ko si Pedro, dio dod to lama. Nigligad dio to marani kandin ka songo binulan no boi to sika Labow to mgo talagpanubad.
kamiara
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Un-unawa ka kakogal to ulu now to sika dangob no mgo otow. Waro kow pad naan makasabut? Agad nokoy no igtagu ta to bo-bo ta ogpakabayo dio to gotok ta no oglibuwas to lawa ta.
talawon
olog
Ogsalayon ka batò.
lagotong
Ka otow no warò aporu, ogngaranan noy no warò batasan.
pulid
Pananglitan, tibo kinow, duon lawa ta no mohon-ing ka sumpul to tag sagboka no lawa ta. Di ka tibo to sikan no sumpul, ogloinloin to katondanan.
sikanak
Pogkaponga to sikan, nig–ugpo pad si Pablo dio to Kurintu to pila pad no mgo allow no nigpanuguntugun din on ka mgo nigtuu. Nigduma rin on si Akila daruwa ki Prisila no nighipanow sikandan dio to lunsud to Sinkria woy nigpatabulug pad si Pablo no igmaganangon to duon impangulibot din to Magboboot no natuman din on. Pogkaponga, nigsakoy on sikandan to barku no oghondio to Siria.
Ian ka ogkabalagad no igkabaybayari ka ogkatowkow su inat to du-on ogkalo-in on to ogkabalagaron woy to og-aguantoon.
lunow
balangit
Di su nohimu kinow on no mgo sakup to Magboboot, og-awoson to waro maroot no mgo batasan ta. Kono ki oghilabot to kono no asawa ta woy kono ki oggogolgol to mgo kalaglagan.
Di duon soini no natagaan ta atag tongod ki Hisus, to impamalintok pad ka ngaran din to mgo diwata to Magboboot. No nohimu ka sikan oyow ogpakimatoy si Hisus to tibo no mgo otow su ian ka igkohoy-u to Magboboot kanta tibo. No kuntoon, nabogayan on sikandin to dakol no karoyawan woy to oyow ogmabantug on su ligkat to sikan no pogkamatoy rin kanta.
Di ko ogsumsumanon ta ka kanta no goinawa ko duon salo ta woy kid ogkoon, kono ki poron oglogparan to Magboboot.
dukul
Ka sangkod no pala-os, ogko-unawa on to kuglung.
Sikan ian no nigsulatan ku sikaniu tibo no dio to lunsud to Ruma no indakoli to Magboboot to goinawa lagkos to nohimu kow on no sakup din. Ogbuyu a kaniu to Magboboot woy ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu oyow ogkohoy-uan kow woy ogbogayan kow to maawang no pog-ugpo now.
Kaniu pad ka og-unoy-unoy.
Ogkounawa rod ko duon pogtuu ta di waro igbulig ta su ian ogkounawaan ka nighab-unan no boni no namatoy on.
No innangonnangon dan ka kinagian to Magboboot dio to lunsud to Pirga. Pogkaponga, nigtopak on sikandan to lunsud to Atalia.
la-in
himoloy
Ko ogpitow ki to ispiu, ogkito-on ta ka alung ta.
bugtung
sinogow
boloy
Woy boot dod to Amoy rin oyow, ligkat to nighimu ni Hisus no nigtulu ka langosa rin to pogkamatoy rin to krus, ogkohimu no igpalibong on dio to Amoy ka tibo no kai to soini no kalibutan woy ka dio to langit. No ian oyow tibo ogmaroyow on to goinawa to Magboboot.
Ka buus, du-on alabat, ka multicab woy “jeep”.
To nakaponga nigkoon, nigkagian ni Hisus si Pedro. Nig-inso din to, “Koykow Simon, anak ni Huan, labow ka goinawa nu koddi to goinawa koddi to soini no mgo duma nu?”Nigtabak si Pedro to, “Hoo, Buyag; nataga ka to duon goinawa ku koykow.”Kagi ni Hisus kandin, “Bantayi nu ka mgo anak to karniru ku,”
Diò to kanami, og-awoson to matapid ki oyow konò ki ogkabu-ingan.
Simbalu si Taganay.
Duon allow no nighipanow si Hisus no nanagpitsagpit dio to mgo lunsud mgo hilit no nignangonnangon to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod to Pogsugu to Magboboot. Nigduma ki Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din no sampulu woy darua.
Ogkounawa ian to Amoy ku songo nataga koddi woy nataga a to Amoy ku. Agad ka koddi no kamatayon ka igliwan ku to kamatayon to mgo karniru ku.”
Imbogoy rin kanak ka nati to kalabow.
tu-ud
To oghokaron dan on ka hikot to nati, kagi to mgo tagtuun to nati to, “Manio to oghokaron now ka hikot to nati?”
indos
kuwoy
Na-apian ka lukosan to pogko-on su magolgol ka boian.
kamansal
Timoteo, nataga ka to nig-iniugan ad to tibo no otow no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu no duon to probinsia to Asia lagkos ki Pigilu woy si Hirmoginis.
Kagi to diwata kandin to, “Panginabo kad on woy panapatus kad,” No nigpaagad–agad on si Pedro. Woy kagi to diwata kandin to, “Bukusi nu ka lawa nu to sikan no malayat no kinabo nu no luyud kad on kanak.”
Manio naan to ian do niglibong to oyow ogsayo sikandin to Magboboot ka soini no taga Samaria no kono man atag no Taga Hudia no unawa kanta?”
Woy nigbogayan nu sikandin to katondanan to ogboboot to tibo no kalaglagan kai to soini no kalibutan.” Ka ignangon kai, ko nigboot ka Magboboot to oyow ogkabobootan to otow ka tibo no kalaglagan no nohimu, waro agad nokoy no kono din ogkabobootan. Di kuntoon, nataga ki to waro pad makaboboot ka otow to tibo to agad nokoy.
Songo ogkounawa rod to mgo otow no og-alap-alap to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon. Nigsugu ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta to oyow ka mgo otow no ogpamminog to sikan no Nangnangonon, ogpakabogoy to pog-ugpo to mgo otow no og-anad kandan.
Nigpipitow si Hisus kandan no kagi rin to, “Kono ian ogkohimu to mgo otow, di agad nokoy ogkohimu to Magboboot.”
Utasa nu.
hinggat
indanan
“Di ogtumanon ku ka tibo no insugu to Amoy ku oyow ogkataga ka mgo otow no waro nigtuu to dakol so goinawa ku to Amoy ku. Nò, oghipanow kid on.”
batuk
pilpil
bagwanan
soluton
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin to, “Malogot ian no si Elias ka oghun-a su igpanagana din ka dalan to sika Im-imanan now.
agow
Di nigparagas sikandan nigbabansagon to ogpohimatayan si Hisus dio to krus. Bali naan naroog ka kagi no igkoiniat poron ni Pilatu.
Dokad di, agad ko ka salo dan, waro mog-unawa lagboy to salo ni Adan no niglop-ang to insapad to Magboboot kandin, di ligkat dongan ki Adan taman ki Moisis, tibo no mgo otow ogkamatoy. Si Adan ka ogpanag-ilingan ta to dangob no Otow no si Hisus no pogkalugoy, songo nighondii to tano.
Nabbutud kow on ian. Hondoi naan ka labow no pulus dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, ka igtubad woy ko ka tubaranan su ligkat to tubaranan to Dakol no Ampuanan to Magboboot ka pulus to igtubad now.
Warò dan pogtomua to pogkamot.
Kono ta oglokaan ka og-im-imanan ta no pig-abin ta woy kono ki ogduaruwa su ogkasaligan ta ka Magboboot to ogtuman to tibo no insabut din.
Nò, kono ku man ogkoison ka sikan no pogkohoy-u to Magboboot kanta. Ian su ko ian pa ogpakamaroyow kanta dio to tangkaan din ka pogtuman ta to sikan no mgo Balaod ni Moisis, warad on pulus ka pogkamatoy ni Kristu.
iling
Ian su nokani, nig-ugpo ki pad to kausiloman. Di kuntoon, duon kid on to kaawangan su nohimu kid on no mgo sakup to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. Sikan ian to og-awoson to ogmaroyawon ta mgo batasan ta oyow oglitos ka poghipanow ta dio to dalan to Magboboot no maawang.
No nataga a, ko ogpokouma ad on dio to kaniu, dakol ka pogkohoy-u no igkabogoy ni Hisu Kristu kanta no ogligkat to pogtuu ta.
“Magboboot no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag noy, Mamabogbog ka to tibo, no sikoykow ka Magboboot dongan woy ka kuntoon woy taman to waro katamanan. Ogpasalamatan noy sikoykow su nigpurut nud on ka pandatuan nu no mabogbog lagboy woy nigbunsud kad on to pog-alap nu to mgo koot-otawan kai to kalibutan.
Moon-ing lagboy ka alamara no oglusud to mgo usig dan.
Ogpallaguy ka sikan no ogpabantayan su kono no tagtuun to karniru sikandin. Waro goinawa rin to mgo karniru.
turakan
gopasan
kalung
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Ko hontow no otow no ogdaru no ungod oglingi-lingi, kono matul-id ka dalan din. Ogkounawa ka sika otow no katiglingi-oy ka goinawa rin dio to baloy rin; kono no litos dio to Pogsugu to Magboboot.”
butotolin
Pogpitow ku man do, no duon nigkita ku ka maputi no sagapun woy duon ka nigpinpinnuu to sikan no ogkoiling to Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan. Duon tangkulu rin no bulawan woy duon niggongonan din no magalang no likung.
ti-tì
luboy
No to pogpamilikpilik din, kagi ni Moisis to, “Soini ka langosa no igmalogot to sabut to Magboboot kaniu, no og-awoson no ogtumanon ta su ian ka insugu din.”
Woy nigsamsaman ni Hisus ka mgo bato no nig-ampuan din sikandan. Napongaan, nighipanow on sikandin.
Ogbuyu koy to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu to oyow ogkasabutan now on ian ka dakol no goinawa to Magboboot kaniu woy to oyow ogkaaguanta now ka mgo igkabaybayari now no ogligkat to pogbulig ni Hisu Kristu to goinawa now.
òpalis
Ian su waro loin no ogkohimu no unturanan ko kono no sikan do no nohimu on no ogpounturan to pogtuu ta ko kono no si Hisu Kristu ro ian.
Nò, nigpasolod ni Pedro ka magaliug din woy nokohirogo pad sikandan. Pogkapawo, nigdumaan on ni Pedro sikandan no namanghipanow no og–uli dio ki Kornilio. Woy duon dod mgo nigtuu no mgo taga Hupi no songo nanduma kandan.
Duon dod inso ni Pilatu ki Hisus su mohon-ing ka imbayung to sikan no mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad. Nig-inso ni Pilatu to, “Manio to kono ka ogtabak? Pamminog ka to tibo no igbayung dan koykow.”
Agboti nu to og-andal ka harayu.
Duon dod ig-alkuy to boi kandin. Kagi rin, “Ka kanami no minuna no matig Samaria, pig-ampuan dan ka Magboboot kai to soin no bubungan. Di sikaniu no mgo Hudiu, ignangon now to og-awos to dio ki ro og-ampu to Hirusalim to sika Dakol no Ampuanan.”
Di kagi man do ka datu to, ‘O Apu Abraham, kono dan ian ogpamminogan, di ko duon pa otow no ogkootawan no ogligkat to mgo nammatoy no oghondio no ognangon kandan, og-ongkoran dan on ka mgo maroot no batasan dan.’
Ko nabogayan ki to katouanan to ogbulig to duma ta, og-awoson ta to ogtuman to sikan. No ko duon katouanan ta to og-anad to duma ta, songo og-awoson ta to oghimu ki to sikan.
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Malogot ka soini no ignangon ku kaniu to duon kai kuntoon no mgo otow no woy ogkamatoy ko ogkoumaan pad to pogdatong to Pandatuan to Magboboot no ogdumaan to dakol no kabogbogan.”
su waro niglayag ka allow. Ka makopal no manggad no nigbitoy dio to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu nagisi no napori on.
Pananglitan, agad ka mgo pulondag woy ka mgo kuglung no waro goinawa ran, ko kono ogkalituk, songo kono ta man ogkasabutan.
warò
Si Alihandro no talagsalsal to burunsi, maroot lagboy ka nighimu rin kanak. Di ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta ka ogsuli kandin no igsokod to mgo hinimuan din.
aras
Sikan ian to namanoug on si Pedro. Kagi rin to sikan no mgo lukos to, “Sikanak ka ogpamanghoon now. Og–inso a kaniu ko nokoy ka tuud now kanak?”
laguy
doromdom
ogba
Nò, nigdinog ku ka mgo otow dio to langit no nigmaagbot man do to nigkagi to, “Sayoon tanow ka Magboboot su taman to waro katamanan, ungod og-oobol ka hapuy no ogsilab to sikan no mabantug no lunsud to Babilunia.”
yubuyubu
talibongbong
Ogmanimba ka sikan no mgo otow di kono dan ogtuuan ka kabogbogan to Magboboot. Timoteo, kono ka og-amut kandan
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Ayad-ayad kow no waro agad sagboka no otow no oggawayan kaniu,
Si Pablo, nigpurut to kayu no igtomog. No to pogsabuk din to kayu dio to hapuy, duon ulod no niglibuwas su naralap to hapuy no nigpoongot–ongot to nigkagat to bolad ni Pablo.
Ka otow no ogging-it, ogti-om ko ogngisi. Songo otow rò ka ogko-iling.
Nasulat to Balaod now to malogot ka kagi ko ogtitigus ka darua no otow ko un-unawa ka ignangon dan.
Pogkaponga, nig–ulug dan ka hop–at no palibatu oyow kono ogkaanlas ka barku su ogkahallok ko ogganlad on to mgo batu. No nan–ampu sikandan su ogkoiniatan dan to ogmagaan porom ogkapawo ka langit.
Ungod oglibonglibong taman to ogkapurut din ka ogbuyu-on din. Ogko-iling to ogkapogos ka ogbuyu-on din.
“Nighutuk man do ka tagtuun sugua ka dangob no suguonon din dio to pinamula rin di songo niglamposan to mgo talagbantoy lagkos to pigpasiporan dan sikandin woy songo nigpouli dan sikandin no waro naalap to agad nokoy.”
gupit
Kagi to sulat ni Dabid to: “Duon igkarago to otow no nigpasaylu on ka mgo salo din no konad on ogdoromdomon to Magboboot ka mgo salo din.
doyow
Nò, dakol ka pogsalig ku woy ka pogsayo ku kaniu. Agad to mohon-ing ka igkabaybayari noy, ogkabuligan lagboy ka goinawa ku woy dakol lagboy ka igkarago ku.
Kono kow ogkasasow to sikan no mohirap no ogpokouma kaniu asolom. Balagara now ka mohirap no wa pad mokouma. Kono now on ogdugangi ka igkasasow now kuntoon.
tubad
dayangdayang
doldog
ilag
galat
Ko ogka-agkapan, ogkohonat kow kunto-on diò to Maambago su ngilaman pad to mangayow.
Sikan ian to nataga ki to, ka nighimu ni Abraham, nakaruma ro to pogtuu rin. Woy ligkat to nighimu rin, nohogot on ka pogtuu rin.
Ian su, ko duon boi no kono ogtorongan ka ulu rin, litos no ogtamporan ka bulbul din. Di su ogkasipod man ko ogkatamporan woy ko ogkatabulugan ka ulu rin, litos no ogtorongan din ka ulu rin ko oglimudlimud kow no og-ampu.
No kagi ni Pedro to, “Nò mgo sulod, ogpakanangon a kaniu to waro igduwaruwa ku to si Dabid, namatoy on dongan no insabal on. No taman kuntoon, duon dod man ka sabalanan din kai to kanta. Di ian to innangon ni Dabid ka sikan, su dongan, talagnangon sikandin to kinagian to Magboboot. No nataga si Dabid woy impanoy rin innangon ka pogkouyag ni Kristu uromo ligkat to kamatayon din. Ian su natagaan din ka insabut woy nigpangulibot ka Magboboot kandin to duon ogpokouma uromo no kapunganan din no ogkohimu on no lagboy no igbuyag woy ogkabogayan on to pandatuan din. Kagi rin to, “Waro ongkori dio to Hadis no ian ugpaan to mgo nammatoy, woy songo waro mamolu ka lawa rin.”
bayò
Nig-uyun si Hudas kandan no ligkat to sikan no allow, ungod din ogsumansuman ko ogmonuon din oyow ogkagawayan din si Hisus oyow ogkaayunan dan to ogdakop no waro ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no ogkataga.
Ko ogbagtos ka mgo ulod-ulod, ogdorongan ka oghagtong no ogkakagi.
Manio no ogkasasow kow to kinabo now? Pitawa now ka mgo bulak no ogtubu dio to koilawan. Kono ogtalabau sikandan woy kono oghihimu sikandan to kinabo dan.
bagkos
Sikan su duon allow no ogkoumaan kow on to dakol no igkabaybayari now no ogpakakagi on ka mgo otow to, ‘Kapulusan pad ian ka mgo boi no waro nig-anak woy to kono ogkaboros, woy kapulusan pad ian ka mgo boi no waro nigpasusu to bato,’ ” kagi ni Hisus.
Naponga sikandin nig-ampu, niglibong sikandin dio to mgo hibatoon din woy nig-inso to, “Oghibathibat kow pad naan woy oghirogo? Pitow kow! Koddi, ka Kakoy to mgo koot-otawan, noumaan ad on no igpanabod ad dio to mgo otow no makasasalo.
usang
bunbun
Ogkasundang ki.
Pogpitow ku no napulasan on ka langit. Nigkita kud ka maputi no kuddo. Ka nigpanguddo, nighingaranan ki Masalig woy Tu-tuu ian. matuwarong ka pogboboot din, woy songo matuwarong ka pogsulung din to mgo usig din.
Nigtabak ka anak din, kagi, ‘A, kona a.’ Di nahalin din ka goinawa rin no nighondio sikandin.
Omunaan to imbogoy to Magboboot ka Balaod din su oyow ogpakatimul ka pogtokod to mgo otow to nakasalo on ian sikandan to Magboboot. Agad to natimtimulan on ka mgo salo to mgo otow, dakoldakol pad man do ka pogtimul to pogkohoy-u to Magboboot to mgo otow.
No manio naan to waro nu impasamboy ka salapi ku oyow nig-anak porom woy natimulan porom ka salapi ku to pog-uli ku.’
Nigboklas to boi ka linobaan din no nigpunpun din on.
olog
Nò, duon pad dio ki Hisus ka mgo hibatoon ni Huan to nigbawian on ni Hisus ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no mohirap on ka dalu ran. Songo nigdogil din ka busow to duma no mgo otow. Lagkos, mohon-ing ka nabutud no nigbawian din no nakakita on.
Duon dangob no impananglitan ni Hisus. Kagi rin, “Manio sikoykow no ogsagmanon nu ka malintok do bag no igkabuog dio to mata to duma nu di waro ka nigsagman to duon nakabalabag no batang dio to koykow no mata?
lunung
laba
Katiglingoy a pad porom to landingan.
Agad kono no mgo Hudiu do. Ogpakatagkos ka tibo no mgo otow no ogtuu kandin agad hondoi ogmokougpo kai to soin no kalibutan oyow sagboka ro so lawa to tibo no ogtuu.
Ogpingpingawon ad to mananoy og-ulì.
singgalung
“Ogkounawa to goinawa to Amoy ku koddi ka koddi no goinawa kaniu. Ungod kow og-ugpo to maroyow oyow kono kow ogkaawo kai to taliwaro to pusung ku.
opus
Ko nigdinog ka mgo sakup, mohon-ing no nigkagi to, “Mohirap ka soin no innangon din. Hontow buwa ka ogpakasabut to soini?”
kulut
Ko warò ponong no woig, warò ogkoimu no mgo basakan no homoy.
no-omno-om
Nò, su nigtuu kow on to, si Hisu Kristu, ian ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, og-awoson to oyow ka mgo batasan now, oglitos kandin. No ka sikan, ogligkat to ogkasagboka ka goinawa now kandin.
Nabolongbolong ka tibo no mgo duma rin no nigkagi sikandan to, “Hontow naan ka soini no lukos? Agad ka kalamag woy luwak ogpaagad-agad kandin.”
sumpalit
komol to lakup
Ka otow no ogpokoimu to pamulingan, du-on kabogbogan din to ogpokoimu to mgo kabongbolonganan
Di agad hontow no nigtinawo kandin no nigtuu on kandin, pigbogayan to katondanan to ogkohimu sikandan no mgo anak to Magboboot.
Di ko nokouma dio to Galilia, nigtinawo ka mgo otow ki Hisus. Pigtinawo dan su pigkita ran ka tibo no pighimu ni Hisus dio to Hirusalim su songo nighondio ka mgo otow no og-amut to sikan no Pagkoonan to mgo Hudiu.
Ka oghimuon to sikan no mgo talagpanubad no kai to tano, tigbal do no ogkoiling woy ogkounawa ro to alung to sikan no tu-tuu ian no Kinaroyawan no Ampuanan no dio to Langit. Ogkounawa ian ki Moisis dongan, su to nigpohimu on ka Magboboot kandin to sikan no tagooran no ampuanan, kagi rin ki Moisis to, “Og-awoson to og-unugan nu ka impapitow ku koykow no dio ka pad to bubungan.”
To pogkita ran ki Hisus, woy agad duon mgo duma ran no nigduwa-ruwa to nootawan to kamatayon din, nigsayo dan sikandin to nakitaan dan sikandin.
Ognangonan ku sikaniu no uromo to allow to poglogpad to Magboboot, ka tuud to kuntoon no kagi now no waro pulus, sikan ka insoon din kaniu.
tabang
kagud
Mohon-ing lagboy ka mgo otow no nokouma dio kandin. Nig-alap dan ka mgo otow no noumil, woy napulid, woy nabbutud woy ka noomaw. Songo nig-alap dan ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no nandaralu. Inpanabuk dan dio to tangkaan ni Hisus no nigbawian din ka tibo.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ko si Dabid, nighingaranan din sikandin to Lagboy no Igbuyag din. To malogot soini, manio to ignangon to mgo otow to pinanganak ni Dabid ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan?” kagi ni Hisus.
Manio to pigbigtow now ka hikot to gakit ku?
saput
Bitsaida ka ugpaan ni Pilipi no lunsud ian ni Andres woy si Pedro.
Duon dod ka karoyawi to layag to allow. Woy songo loin ka karoyawi to layag to bulan. Woy songo loin man do ka karoyawi to layag to mgo bituon. Agad ka mgo bituon, songo ogloinloin ka kandan no karoyawi.
olat
Tibo no mgo otow no nigpamootan to Amoy ku, sikandan ian ka ogtuu koddi. Woy agad hontow no ogtuu koddi, kono ku og-ongkoran sikandan; ogsagmanon ku ro sikandan
Marolag do ka otow no ogpakimatoy no ogpangabang to otow no matuwarong. Songo kuwo buwa ko duon otow no oglangub no ogpakimatoy no ogpangabang to otow no maroyow.
Nakatotongtong si Kornilio kandin su lagboy on ian no nahallok. No nigtabak si Kornilio to, “Nokoy buyag?” Kagi to diwata to, “Pigdinog to Magboboot ka kagi nu no nig–ampu ka. Woy maroyow rin ka igbogoy nu to mgo otow no ogkohirapan. Woy narago ka Magboboot koykow,” kagi.
Dokad di to nataga si Hisus to bantaan dut goinawa to mgo hibatoon din, nigpurut din ka songo bato no impasasindog din to longod din.
“Sikoddi, mohon-ing porom ka kagi ku bahin kaniu woy mohon-ing ka igboot ku porom to oghimuon now. Di kona a su ian ku ignangon kaniu ka nigdinog kud to sikan no nigsugu koddi kai to soin no kalibutan no malogot ka tibo no ignangon din.”
“Alapa now kai to koddi,” kagi ni Hisus.
bakit
Ka sika mgo otow no nigkokoon dio, lalimma no libu ka mgo lukos.
Su ian ian, ogpasalamatan ta ka Magboboot to nasakup kid on to pogpangatondanan din no kono ogkaawo to waro katamanan. Woy ogsayoon ta sikandin to igmaroyow to goinawa rin no iglagkos ta ka pogtahud ta woy ka pogkahallok ta
Daruan allow woy maosang.
Og-ali-ad ka miow no ogbabalintu-ad ko ogli-ag to duma rin no miow.
tugu
labas
so-ol
Sikan no lawa to pula, oggalungon noy.
pulipus
Pogkaponga to nigkoon sikandan, nigpurut din man do ka basu no duon woig to bogas to bunal. No kagi rin kuwo to mgo hibatoon din to, “Ka soini basu to woig to bunal, ian igmaganangon to ka langosa ku ka oghimu to iam no dalan dio to Magboboot. Libonglibongi now to og-inum, no ko og-inum kow, doromdomi a now ro to kamatayon ku.”
amana
ulobang
bungit
Nò, niglimudlimud ka mgo igbuyag to talagpanubad woy ka mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu dio to dakol no baloy to Labow to Talagpanubad no si Kaipas ka ngaran din.
anugang
Katangusan ki.
duliak
tayungtung
Di nigtabak ka igbuyag dan to, ‘Ka ignangon ku kaniu, ka sika otow no ogkasaligan, ogdugangan man do. Di ka otow no kono ogkasaligan, oghawion do ka agad sikan no doisok no insalig kandin.
sabandal
Ka soini no oghimuon dan kaniu, ian su waro mogtokod to Magboboot no Amoy woy wara a ran tokora to Anak a rin.
lagoy
nangon
Sikan ian mgo sulod, to kono ki ogkabolongbolong ko, ka mgo suguanon ni Satanas, songo ogpoiling-iling to batasan to mgo suguanon to Magboboot no nohimu on no maroyow dio to kandin. Nò to mohuri no allow ogbogayan ka sikan mgo kono no malogot no mgo suguanon to litos no igbayad to mgo hinimuan dan no maroot.
panò
Songo kagi ni Hisus, “Ka batasan to mgo otow ko oglibong a kai to tano uromo, songo ogkounawa rod to batasan to mgo otow dongan to mgo allow pad ni Lot. Nigkokoon, nig-iinum, lagkos to mgo ogbolion dan woy ka mgo baligya dan. Nigpapamula sikandan woy nanhimu to mgo baloy.
Ka soini no ignangon noy kaniu, ogligkat to kagi ni Hisus no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta to, sikanta no duon dod kai to soini no tano no oglibong sikandin kai to tano, kono ki ogpokohun-a kandan dio to kandin.
Igsugkip ka sugkad
silì
lutoy
Nigtabak kandan to, “Ogkoiniatan koy to ogpokoglimang koy ogpinnuu dio to longod nu dio to sikan no pandatuan nu no maroyow.”
sallong
Omunaan no kono kow ogkahallok su dakoldakol ka igkannugan to Magboboot kaniu no mgo otow to mgo manukmanuk.
Ko oglo-ug ka inoy to batò no oghilamon, ipagalat din ka anak din diò to songo otow no ian ka ogtamong.
talatala
Sikan ian ogtimulan ta pad ka salapi ku oyow og-olog-olog to pogdatong dio to Maambago.
Woy doyowroyow kow ro oyow waro agad sagboka no oghilabot to kono no asawa rin woy to oyow kono ki ogkoiling ki Isau dongan no inat to waro pulus din to og-unug to Magboboot su insaliu rin on ka kandin no pogkakakoy to songo pogkoon do.
Duon allow now uromo no ogkoumaan kow on to mgo usig now no oglopow no ogkalinglingotan kow on nikandan oyow agad hondoi kow ogpakabalikid, warad ogkabayaan now. Bali naan no ogpinakion kow dio to solod.
Nighutuk nignangon si Hisus to, “Ogduma kaniu ka kalinow.” Nigsugu din sikandan no kagi rin, “Songo ogsuguon ku sikaniu no ogkounawa to nigsugu ad to Amoy ku no Magboboot.”
Ko pokogbotak on ka Pagkoonan, nighondio si Hisus to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu. Nò, nig-anad to mgo otow dio.
kutkut
Di sikaniu no duma no ogtuu kanak no dio to Tiatira, waro kow atag nig-unug to sikan no maroot no in-anad to sikan no boi, woy waro kow maanari to sikan no naan to duma no maralom kun no pogsabut ni Satanas. Sikan ian, warad igtimul ku to sikan no mgo sugu no ogtumanon now.
No ka sikan no mgo otow, nammatoy dongan su sikan ian ka iglogpad to Magboboot to tibo no mgo otow. Di agad to waro makasasalia sikandan to pogkamatoy to sikan no mgo lawa ran, di nanangonan on sikandan to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon oyow ogkabogayan sikandan to kouyagan dan no waro katamanan no ogkoiling to Magboboot no kono ogkamatoy.
“Agad sikaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “songo ogtitigus kow on to mgo otow bahin koddi su nigduma kow koddi ligkat pad to kabinunsuran taman to kuntoon.”
sulib
nipis
hantal
soning
Nò, to pogligat ni Pablo, noiniat din to ogbot–os no oghondio to lunsud to Asun. Sikan ian to nighun–a koy on nigligkat. No nigsakoy koy to barku no nigpanag–ilis koy ro to poghondio noy to Asun. Ian tuud noy to ogtuluyon noy si Pablo dio to lunsud to Asun.
Nò mgo sulod no indakoli kud to goinawa, su ian ian, maroyow ko tibo kinow, og-ay-ayaran ta to ogpamminog to kinagian to Magboboot. Di woy ki ro ogkagi to duma ta ko ogsumsumanon ta pad ko nokoy ka litos no igtabak ta. Woy maroyow ko mananoy ki ogkabolu.
Ka gabi-i no allow ka allow no nigligad on.
Nò, nabolongbolong koy to innangon to mgo boi no nigsolom nighondio to pigsabalan ki Hisus
Nò, sikaniu no mgo pogbuyagon, tantanuri now ka pogtuu now woy ka pogtuu to mgo sakup to Magboboot, su ka Gimukud din ka nighimu kaniu no mgo talagbantoy to mgo otow no nohimu on no sakup din no ian napurut din su ligkat to langosa to Anak din lagboy no si Hisus.
ugdang
kasakasan
Ko oglanos on ka tibolus to agoloy, ogpatokod to ogtasikan ka agoloy.
Ka mgo otow no niglo-inlo-in to kinagian, konò ogpokogdahagdahag to mgo kinagian dan. Warò mokogsabut to kinagian.
Nò, ogkaloglogoban kinow tibo to sikan no kabogbogan no igpatokod to nigdumaan ki to Gimukud to Magboboot su oyow ogpakabulig ki to tibo no ogtuu ki Hisus.
Waro malugoy no imbaligya to hari ka kandin no bahin no tano woy ayam to salapi no nighipanow no dio mogdolog to mariu no ugpaan. Pogkouma rin dio, nigdaatdaat din on ka salapi din to agad nokoy no noiniatan din no igkarago din.
Ko darua ka du-on asawa, og-i-iras.
Lunis
woy su kono no si Adan ka nagawayan ni Satanas, di si Iba ka nagawayan. No ligkat to sikan, niglop-ang on to boi ka insapad kandan.
Di si Birnabi atag, pighinggat din si Saulo dio to mgo suguanon ni Hisus. No innangonnangon ni Birnabi kandan ka sikan no poghipanow ni Saulo no nighondio to Damasku woy ka impapitow kandin to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus no niglibuwas kandin dio to dalan. Woy innangon din to nigkagi si Hisus kandin woy to waro mahallok si Saulo no ognangonnangon to mgo taga Damasku tongod ki Hisus.
Ogtibuluson tanow ogdoromdomon ka ogpakatimul to karoyawon ta no dio to Langit. Kono tad ogdoromdomon ka ogkoiniatan to mgo otow kai to soini no kalibutan,
Ka sikan no bulanbulan, lagboy no malayag ka amag din.
Kuntoon, mgo sulod, agad nokoy ka ogkabayaan ku, og-awoson to og-unugon now ka sikan no ingkaanad ku kaniu no nigligkat to Maroyow no Nangnangon tongod ki Kristu. Ko sikan ian ka oghimuon now, agad ko kono ad ogpokohondio to kaniu, ogdinogon ku to manokal ka pogtuu now su nasagboka ro ka goinawa now woy ka tuud now to pogpoomot to ogpabubuligoy kow oyow mohon-ing pad ka ogtuu to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu.
bidbid
tumpì
Ognangonan kow rò ko ogkapalusan on.
Amana sikaniu no pinanganak to mgo nighimatoy to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, iparagas now pa nasi to nabunsuran now on to poghimu to mgo kaap-apuan now.
songo kuò
batò
linubùn
so-ong
Nò, nighipanow on woy si Pedro no ka tibo no mabayaan dan, unawa ian to innangon ni Hisus kandan, no nighimu ran on ka pagkoonan dan to Pagkoonan to Paligad.
Ko ogpokouma a dio to kaniu, og-ugpo a buwa pad. Songo kuwo buwa ko woy ad oghipanow ko ogkapongaan on ka tiglongdong oyow ogpakabulig kow kanak ko ogligkat a dio to agad hondoi a ogpakarolog.
Panimpuruk ka agoloy.
Kagi ni Hisus kuwo to mgo hari rin, “Waro pad mokouma ka litos no allow ku to oghondio to ogtuman to bantaan to Magboboot koddi. Di kaniu, tibo no mgo allow litos ko oghipanow kow.
bukad
losuk
tokod
Woy kagi rin kanak to, ‘Kuntoon, alam ka to mgo otow no ogsuguon nu dio to Hupi no og-angoy ki Simon no ian angga din no si Pedro. Duon og–ugpo to marani to dagat dio to baloy to otow no songo oghingaranan ki Simon no sagboka no talaglinas to laplap to ayam.’
Nò, nigsaparan ni Hisus ka busow dut bato no narogil on no ian ka igkabawi to bato.
konò ogka-ayun
Igpandogpak ka maroot dio to imperno no lagboy no moinit ka hapuy no ogkikigot ka mgo ngipon dan woy ogsisinogow sikandan to ogkabaybayaran lagboy sikandan.”
latunan
songo
sulod
Igpakang nu ka mo-irob diò to tu-od.
Ka bulak no ogmukulmukul, konò pad ogpangabukad.
hillop
Du-on bolok to batò ko darua on no simana ligkat to pogko-otow rin. Og-unuk to gatas din. Ogka-awò dò ka bolok din ko dakol on
No nigbuyu to mgo sulat no og–alapon din dio to mgo igbuyag to mgo anaranan to mgo Hudiu no dio to lunsud to Damasku oyow ko duon nig–amut to Dalan to pogtuu ki Hisus, igbogoy ran ki Saulo oyow ogdakopon din on sikandan, mgo lukos woy ka mgo boi. No ogbanggutan din woy og–alapon din dio to Hirusalim su igpapirisu rin on.
Pulù ka Cebu su tibò woig ka ilis
Nò nigdatong sikandan dio to tano no oghingaranan to Golgota, no ka kalitukan “Bokog to Ulu.”
Ka ogparatongan no allow, ian ka asolom.
Pogkaponga to pogkamatoy ni Hisus woy to pogkouyag din, duon kohop–atan no allow no malasi niglibuwas si Hisus dio to mgo suguanon din. Woy mohon–ing ka hinimuan din no igmalogot to nouyag on ian ka lawa rin ligkat to kamatayon din. Woy malasi innangonnangon ni Hisus kandan ka ogtumanon to Magboboot to pandatuan din.
tingangag
Ko ogdarampil ki to agoloy, ogkilos pad su mo-ilow.
Nò, ogsumansuman a to, ‘koddi, warad on igkasasow ku su duon on impanagana ku litos ko pila buwa no tuid. Soini naan do ka oghimuon ku, ogkoon a woy og-inum a no ian igkatalantan ku ka igkarago ku,’ kagi to goinawa to datu.
Nò mgo sulod,” kagi ni Pablo, “Ogpohitagaan noy lagboy sikaniu to, ligkat to nohimu ni Hisus, ogkapasaylu ka mgo salo ta.
Si Saulo, nig–uyun to kamatayon ni Istiban. Di duon mgo otow no dakol so goinawa ran to Magboboot. No nig–alap dan ka lawa ni Istiban woy dakol ka pogpandawot dan no inlobong dan on. No ligkat to sikan no allow to pogkamatoy ni Istiban, nigbunsud on ka dakol no igkabaybayari. No ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to Hirusalim, nigbaybayaran on to mgo otow no waro mogtuu. No ka mgo otow no nigtuu, nokogsuwoysuwoy on no dio mogdolog to agad hondoi no lunsud duon to probinsia to Hudia woy dio to Samaria. No ian naan do nagalat dio to Hirusalim ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus.
apot
alabat
Silangon ki to allow.
bunbun
Ulaton ka to busow
Duon dod kagi ni Hisus to, “Nighondini ad to soi kalibutan oyow koddi ka ogpatokoron ka mgo otow ko nigtuu woy ko waro. Ka mgo otow no waro mataga to Magboboot no inat nabbutud sikandan, ogpakahimata. Woy ka mgo otow atag no nahan dan no ogpakakita kandan on ka ogkounawa to ogkabutud.”
Ian su, kono no ka boi ro ka ogboboot to lawa rin; songo ogboboot ka asawa rin. Woy kono no ka lukos do ka ogboboot to kandin no lawa su songo ogboboot ka asawa rin.
tarong
dalow
Ka alad to sikan no lunsud, impountud to sampulu woy daruwa no dagdakol no mgo batu no nasulatan to mgo ngaran to sikan no sampulu woy daruwa no mgo suguanon to sikan no Nati no Karniru.
Olog nu bua ka so-ini no kinabò
Nò, su nounawa to nakalagkos kinow on to pogkamatoy ni Kristu, ogtuu ki to songo ogpakalagkos kinow on kandin no ogbogayan ki to kouyagan no ogligkat dio to kandin.
tapuk
Ka otow no du-on ka maroyow no ogkamotan din ogtu-usan din oyow warò otow no ogkamot.
Dokad di, agad hontow, ko sikanami woy ko diwata to Magboboot, ko songo lunsud ka ignangonnangon dan tongod ki Hisus no kono ogpokounawa to innangonnangon noy, maroyow no ogkalogparan to Magboboot sikandan to waro katamanan dio to hapuy.
Si Hisus do ian ka ogpakabogoy to tu-tuu ian no katouanan ta woy ka tu-tuu ian no ogkasabutan ta.
lotuv
Maniò to ogtongtong ka? Makapupu [ka] to butig?
sikan
Malogot soini ignangon ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus. “Ka sikan no otow no ogtuu koddi, ogpokohimu to ogkounawa to koddi no oghimuon woy labow ka kandin no oghimuon su og-uli a dio to Amoy ku.
Ogbokaron.
Nighipanow si Hisus no oghondio to Kapirnaum dio to Probinsia to Galilia. No to Allow to mgo Hudiu to Oghimoloy, nig-anad ni Hisus ka mgo otow.
Nakarongan ki Hisus, niglansang dan ka darua no mgo takawon dio to mgo krus no pinaglimang sikandan dio ki Hisus.
Ko ogtakas ki to ogko-on no ogpanhiposon ka mgo palatu, ogbayawon on.
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, ogdani kinow on to Magboboot su ligkat to tu-tuu ian no goinawa ta kandin woy ka hogot no pogtuu ta. Lagkos to og-awoson to ogmaawangon on ka goinawa ta woy ka mgo doromdom ta su ligkat to naawo on ka mgo maroot no nokoholos. No ka sikan, ogkounawa to naramulasan on ka goinawa ta to langosa ni Hisus woy nakasonob kid on to mating-ow no woig.
luntayog
labung
Ogkoimu on no abug ka alibu ko iglayap to kalamag.
Inhatod dan si Hisus dio to baloy to Labow to mgo talagpanubad no dio niglibulung ka tibo no igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad, mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu woy ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod dan.
Ogkabaya-an ka to gamowgamow, ian nu igdaralu su nataboran ka to malayat no bulbul din.
kumang
balanugan
lapas
unug
oguk
hari
Konò ogkatagu-an to ulod.
dulis
Ogmaduldulugoy ka darua no kalusisi.
ikam
Dokad di duon mgo otow no ogkounawa to sikan no boni no nakasawod to maroyow no tano su ko ogdinogon dan ka nangnangonon, igsabuk dan ka kagi dio to taliwaro to pusung dan. To mgo duma no otow, dakol ka pulus to kagi to Magboboot dio to goinawa ran. To duma pad no mgo otow, dakoldakol ka pulus woy ka duma man do, dakol lagboy ka pulus to goinawa ran.”
wotwot
Nò, songo nignangonan to sikan no amoy ka hari to unawa ian ka innangon din dut kakoy no anak. Nigtabak ka hari to, ‘Hoo, Amo. Oghondio a.’ Di atag waro sikandin nigtuman.”
Turu-turù ki ogpurut to boi ki.
Ian su an-anayan nigligkat ka boi to lukos, di kuntoon, diad to boi ogligkat ka mgo lukos. No ka tibo to agad nokoy duon, nigligkat to Magboboot.
hilut
Pamurut kow pad to lagas su oglagason ta.
Pogkita to mgo otow dio to songo baloy ran woy ka duma no mgo otow no nigkita kandin no ogbuyuan din to salapi dongan, kagi ran, “Soini buwa ian ka otow no ogpinpinnuu no ogpamuyu to salapi kanta!”
Songo abalang dod ni Asat ko oghun-a og-uli
Nignangon a rod to an-anayan, nigpakita si Hisus ki Pedro woy nohutukan makitoi to duma to sikan no sampulu woy daruwa no mgo suguanon din.
Di nasi imbaghot ni Saulo ka ignangonnangon din su igmalogot din lagboy to si Hisus, ian ka Im–imanan to mgo Koot–otawan no oghingaranan ki Kristu. No ka mgo Hudiu no dio to Damasku, warad makatabak.
Ian su tibo kinow ogkamatoy su kapunganan kinow ro ni Adan. Di ligkat to ogsalupung kinow ki Kristu, ogkouyag kinow on ian.
Ko balagon ka igtugul ta to igpaniuk to bali-og, maga-an dò ogkabigtow ko ogkasubid to woig.
na-an dò
Soini, ian ka igkarangob no kabolbolonganan no nighimu ni Hisus ko nokouma dio to Galilia no ogpuun dio to Hudia.
Ogpanumbaloy a dio to kaniu di oghun-a a pad ogpanumbaloy dio to ugpaan to Masidonia su ogtuuran ku to ogbayo dio to Masidonia.
Sikan ian to nigpalimud to mgo suguanon ni Hisus ka tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu kandin. No kagi ran to mgo otow to, “Kono no litos no ogkatalantan koy to pogpanalad to koonon, su ogkoongkoran noy ka soini no igpan–anad noy no kinagian to Magboboot.
Ka soini no sulat, nigligkat kanak no si Pablo. Suguanon a ni Hisu Kristu su ian ka imboot to Magboboot. No pigsugu a rin oyow ogpannangonnangon a to sikan no insabut din kanta no kouyagan ta no ogligkat to ogkasagboka kinow on ki Kristu.
toì
Ka otow no ogligal to Anak to Magboboot, songo waro makagongon to Amoy rin. Di ka otow no ogpaagad-agad to Anak din, songo ogpakagongon to Amoy rin no ka Magboboot.
sabi
togo-od
Ogpokouma ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no og-alap to koddi no ngaran no kagi ran, “Koddi ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan. Nò, ogkagawayan ka mohon-ing no mgo otow.
panoy
Ka pamanayon, sumpul din ka bakalawan woy ka bolad.
Ignangon ku kaniu,’ kagi to igbuyag, ‘ka sikan no mgo otow no an-anayan no nigtugunan ku porom to pagkoonan ku, waro agad sagboka no ogpakatimtim to koonon ku,’ kagi to igbuyag.” Sikan ian ka pananglitan ni Hisus.
Nò, nignangonan ni Hisus do duon to, “Namatoy on si Lasaru
luò
soluk
Ko nigdinog ni Pilatu to soin no kagi ni Hisus, nigpamakutan din oyow ogpalibuwason din si Hisus. Di nigbabansagon ka mgo Hudiu to, “Ko ogpalibuwason nu si Hisus, kono kad on no amigu to labow no igbuyag now dio to Ruma no si Sisar. Agad hontow no og-abinon to sikandin ka Labow no Igbuyag, usig sikandin to Labow now.”
su ko nighutuk pa to igtubad to lawa rin, mohon-ing pad porom ka pogkamatoy rin ligkat to pogkohimu to soini no kalibutan. Dokad di to soini atag ka nighimu rin su, to magaan on ogpokouma ka mohuri no allow ta kai to soini no kalibutan, to kasagboka ro, nootow si Kristu kai to tano oyow ogkaawo on ka mgo salo ta. No ka sikan, nigligkat to pogtubad to kandin no lawa.
Nabala-an to pogul su pogulon.
bugsù
Soini ka igpohitaga rin no tuud din no dongan no ingkoholos. Sikaniu no kono no Hudiu, ligkat to nigtuu kow to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu, songo ogkabogayan kow to mgo karoyawon no igbogoy to Magboboot dio to mgo sakup din no mgo Hudiu. Woy songo nohimu kow on no sumpul to sikan no lawa ni Hisu Kristu. Woy songo ogkabogayan kow to tibo no innangon to Magboboot no igbogoy rin to mgo sakup din su ligkat to nasagboka kow on ki Hisu Kristu.
kabolù
Nokoy ka ogsugbo-on
Duon mgo otow no nakaamut to nalibulung no mgo otow no nigpamminog ki Hisus. Nignangonan dan si Hisus to duon mgo taga Galilia no ogpanubad dan to ayam dio to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu no niglopow ka mgo sundalu no nigsugu ni Gobirnador Pilatu. Dio dan ian himatayi ka mgo taga Galilia to longod to tubaranan. Ka langosa ran, nakaamut on to langosa to ayam no nighimatayan dan.
Kono now ogbobooti ka duma now to pinabayo to ogkitoon now ro. Woy ka ro ogboot ko ogkatagaan nu ko litos.”
Nò, nig-insaan ni Hisus ka sikan no mohon-ing no mgo otow. Kagi rin, “Manio to nigkomkom now ka mgo moirob now woy to mgo kayu to ogdakop koddi? Bak ogpanakow a! Allow allow nigpinnuu a no og-anad to mgo otow dio to Dakol no Ampuanan. Manio to wara a now dakopa rio?
Sikan ian to nigsasindog on si Pedro, no nigduma kandan. Pogkouma ran dio to baloy ni Dorkas, nighinggat dan si Pedro dio to sikan no sinabong no dio to ampow. Ka tibo no mgo boi no nabalu, nigsasindog to longod ni Pedro no ogmaninsinogow. Woy impapitow ran kandin ka mgo sabinit dan no nighimu ni Dorkas no manokal pad.
Koddi no Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan, ogkamatoy a su ian ka bantaan to Magboboot, di kohoy-u ta ka sikan no otow no ogpanabod koddi,” kagi ni Hisus.
Nigtuyuk dan ka asno woy ka nati rin. Inhanig dan ka duma no malayat no kinabo dan, woy nig-untud on si Hisus to asno.
Himua now ka igsugu ku kaniu woy ogpaanad kow koddi su matuwarong a woy ogpohimoloy kow to sika mabogat now.
Di kuntoon atag, nataga kow on to Magboboot, o, ka Magboboot ka lagboy nigtokod kaniu. Nò, su sikan ian, manio to ogkoiniatan now to oghutuk kow no ogpasakup man do to sikan no tinuuan no waro pulus, woy ko goinawa now to ogkohutuk kow on no ogpouripon.
Sopukon si Amasig.
Ko du-on ogko-iniatan no ogpangasawa, og-abalangon. Og-alukuyon ungod ka amoy taman to ogho-o on.
Ian ka igkasasow ku su inat to magaan kow ogpamminog ko duon ogdatong kaniu no og-anad to loin to sikan no in-anad noy kaniu tongod ki Hisus. Woy songo kuwo ko ogtuuan now on ka ig-anad dan no ogligkat to loin no gimukud no kono no ian Gimukud to Magboboot no impasolod now to goinawa now. Woy magaan now ro ogpaag-agaran ka loin no nangnangonon no kono no ka Maroyow no Nangnangonon no nigtuuan now an-anayan.
Di kono no si Hisus ka nigbautismu; ka hibatoon din do ian ka nigpabautismu.
ongod
ponga
Ogmomonu a na-an to boi na-an dò no moirap ku to ogbuì to mgo anak ta no malintok pad.
Sikandan, pinogbalagad dan on ko ogkamatoy on tongod to pogtuman dan to sugu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu.
Nataga on si Hisus ka innangon dan woy nignangon sikandin to, “Balagara now ka sikan no boi. Maroyow lagboy ka nighimu rin kai to koddi.
Kagi ni Pedro to, “Sikan ian no impohondini to Magboboot si Hisus no Suguanon din kai to tano. No nigpohun-a rin sugua kai to kanta no mgo Hudiu oyow ogkohunnaan kid ogkabogayan to karoyawan su tongod to og–ongkoran tad on ka mgo maroot no batasan ta.”
Nò, to mougtu on ka allow, nigmarusilom ka tibo no kalibutan taman to manalinga ka allow.
To marani on si Hisus to lunsud to Hirusalim no nigkita rin on, nakasinogow on sikandin
dolag
opuk
Si Tomas, no si Soping ka angga din, nigkagian din ka duma rin no mgo hibatoon. Kagi rin, “Ogduma kinow to Maistru oyow ogpokounung ki ogkamatoy.”
somod
Ka sikan no otow, nigpamminog to ignangonnangon ni Pablo. No nigtokod ni Pablo ka otow, to duon pogtuu rin no oglitos to ogpoulian on to oggoramon din.
Songo kagi ni Elisabit ki Maria to, “Dakol ka igkarago nu su nigtuu kad to ogkatuman on ka kagi to Magboboot no impanangon din koykow.”
Kuntoon, su nataga kow on man koddi, songo ogkataga kow on porom to Amoy ku. Nò, ligkat kuntoon no pigtokod now on ka Amoy ku woy nakakita kow on kandin.”
Ka sika abalangon, ungod oglibonglibong taman to ogkapurut din ka ogbuyu-on din. Ogko-iling to ogkapogos ka ogbuyu-on din.
kogang
Nò, ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus, ian ka talagpanubad no nakaliwan to sikan no nokohun-a no mgo talagpanubad. Sikandin, kono no pinanganak ni Libi su ian kaap-apuan din si Huda. No to tibo no mgo pinanganak ni Huda, si Hisus doka nohimu on no talagpanubad. Ian su, waro innangon dio to ingkasulat ni Moisis dongan ko duon pinanganak ni Huda no ogkohimu on no talagpanubad.
Pondakan ka malopot lagboy no otow.
kalibutan
siak
Kagi to sikan no boi kuwo ki Pedro to, “Agad sikoykow songo hibatoon ka buwa to sikan no lukos no nigdakop dan.” Nigtabak si Pedro to, “Kona a no duma rin!”
Maistru, duon kun papitu no patalahari no lukos. Nig-asawa ka panganoy no namatoy no waro anak dan.
butud
Nokani nigbunsuran ni Titu to ogbulig kaniu to sikan no igsabuksabuk now no salapi no igpahatod now dio to Hudia. Sikan ian to nigbuyu noy si Titu to oyow oglibong dio to kaniu oyow ogpakatuman kow to soini no igkohoy-u now kandan.
Nigparagas pad woy si Hisuss no niglibong dio to Kana no songo lunsud to probinsia to Galilia no ian ka lunsud no nohimu on ka woig to inumanon. Duon dio to Kana ka sagboka no talagbulig to gobirnu no nigligkat dio to Kapirnaum. Nigdaralu ka anak din no lukos no dio dod to baloy rin dio to Kapirnaum.
lokat
bala-ug
Sikan ian, sumsumana now sikandin no nig-aguanta to ig-ogot to mgo makasasalo. No su nakapoponod sikandin, og-awoson to songo kono ogmalotoy woy kono ogkohunus ka kanta no goinawa to pogtuu ta.
Pogparakop din on, impapirisu ni Hirodis woy duon sampulu woy hon–om no sundalu no pinabantoy rin ki Pedro. No to maallow woy to marusilom, nigbabaadbaad ka mgo sundalu to man hop–at ka ogsoipsoip no ogbantoy. No ian tuud ni Hirodis, ko ogkapongaan on ka sikan no pagkoonan, og–in–insaan din si Pedro duon to tangkaan to mgo otow.
Ko diò a to pantad, nasalanganan ad to pogkalamag to ma-agbot no alimpulus. Nabarut ka pangamuton no nagangu diò to pantad no naligot ka na-alap diò to ampow.
buo
Kagi ran to, “Malogot ian ka soini. Litos to ogkasayo ka Magboboot su sikandin ka mougsob to katouanan din, woy ian ka ogpakagongon to tibo no katondanan woy ka tibo no kabogbogan. Ogpasalamatan ta woy ogdakolon ta ka ngaran din taman to waro katamanan. Malogot ian.”
Ogpakalogob on ka mgo maroot no hinimuan to sikan no mgo otow woy mohon-ing ka mgo otow no ogmalintok naan do ka mgo goinawa ran dio to Magboboot.
sungkud
aligbat
Panubugtubug ki kunto-on.
Ogmaroyawon ta to poghimu to baloy.
Ka Gimukud to Magboboot, songo ogpamalogot ki Hisus su tu-tuu ian ka kagi to Gimukud to Magboboot.
Songo kagi ni Hisus, “Ko pinabayo to sagboka no bolad nu no ogpakasalo ka no og-ongkoran nu ka pogtuu nu to Magboboot, tampori nu ka sika bolad nu. Madmaroyow to ogpokougpo ka no waro katamanan dio to Magboboot no sagsagboka naan do ka bolad nu to igdogpak ka to imperno no duon dod darua no bolad nu. Kono ogkaparongan ka sika hapuy dut imperno.
Namopolod kunto-on
Ogkounawa ian. Ko ogpokouma on ka sikan no igkabaybayari, ogkataga kow to magaan on oglibong ka Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan.
Di, agad malintok, waro koy nigpaagad-agad kandan oyow ka soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu no ian noy in-anad kaniu, kono ogkasolugan to kono no tu-tuu ian.
“Ogsayoon ta ka Lagboy no Igbuyag no kandin ka Magboboot to kapunganan ni Israil su sikandin ka nigbulig to mgo otow no sakup din no nigpalibuwas din sikandan no uripon to mgo salo dan.
tabid
Songo narinog now ka in-anad dongan to kaap-apuan tanow no kono ka oghilabot to kono no asawa nu.
Woy si Hisus dod ka ogpakalabow kanta tibo no nigtuu no ian ogkohingaranan to lawa rin. Sikandin ka ogligkatan to iam no pogkouyag ta woy sikandin dod ka an-anayan no ligkat to lobong no nouyag on to waro katamanan. No ian ian su oyow sikandin ka ogpakalabow to tibo.
Ka Magboboot, nigpohitaga on to dakol no igkabolu din su maroot ka mgo batasan to mgo otow woy su kono dan ogtahuron sikandin. No ka mgo maroot no batasan dan ka ogpakabalabag to pog-anad to tu-tuu no nangnangonon tongod to Magboboot.
bus-ug
Uromo ogkitoon now ka Makahallokhallok no Dorooti no ian ka innangon ni Daniel no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan. Ogsasindog dio to Dakol no Ampuanan to Magboboot. Nò, agad hontow, ko ogbasa ka to soini, ay-ayari nu to ogbasa oyow ogpakasabut ka.
To si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din do, nig-insaan to mgo hibatoon si Hisus to, “Manio no waro koy nakarogil ka busow no nigsolod dut bato?”
Ka kisulà, unawa to upu ka lawa rin no ka bogas din, malayat no gusukon.
Ogtiluk kid to masongot
No ko og-usigon kow to mgo otow, agad ko og-iniugan kow ran woy ko oglomotan kow nikandan woy ko oghingaranan kow to maroot no mgo otow su ligkat to nigtuu kow koddi no ian Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan, ogkapulusan kow rod uromo.
sol-oy
Ka otow no oglinis to solib, ogkoison din ka mgo lagut.
No-ungud ogngisi to warò duma.
Kagi rin to, “Ko dio a pad to lunsud to Hupi, nig–ampu a to Magboboot. No duon impapitow rin kanak. Pogpitow ku no duon ogkoiling to maluag no manggad no nigligkat to langit no pinanghikotan on ka manag–iilis no hop–at. No pigtuntun dio to tangkaan ku.
danatòn
talu-angi
labid
Kandin ian ka pigpuunan to kouyagan woy ka soin no kouyagan ka ogkabat-ow to goinawa to mgo otow.
Kono ogkatou no oghimu to maroyow. Kono ogtuman ko nokoy ka ignangon to duma ran. Waro goinawa ran to duma ran woy kono ogkohoy-u.
Agad ka bulbul ta, nataga ka Magboboot ko pila no aslag ka bulbul ta. Omunaan kono kow ogkahallok to pog-ugpo now su labowlabow pad ka igkohoy-u to Magboboot kaniu to igkohoy-u rin to mgo manukmanuk.”
liwag
Songo buan pad niglosut?
Ko du-on otow no ogkamatayan ig-amulung ta rò to goinawa ran to ogmakogalon ta ka igmasakit to goinawa rin.
olog
Nalugoy on namatoy si Abraham woy si Isaak woy si Hakub to nignangon ka Magboboot ki Moisis to ‘Sikoddi ka Magboboot ni Abraham woy ni Isaak woy ni Hakub.’ Sikandin ka Magboboot to mgo nouyag no mgo otow; kono no Magboboot to mgo nammatoy.”
Pogdinog ni Hisus to inso dan no nigtabak to pananglitan to, “Ka otow no waro dalu kono din og-awos to talagtambal woy ka otow no duon dalu, sikandin ian ka og-awos to talagtambal.
Ogtabak to, "So-ini ka igkanangonnangon ku no guguron diò to kanami no ugpa-an."
sanggot
Kagi ni Hisus, “Nò man, bogayi now si Sisar ko sikandin ka tagtuun woy bogayi nu ka Magboboot ka agad nokoy ko kandin ka tagtuun.” Noinuinu sikandan to tabak din.
Ulaton on ka babuy.
Ian su ka pogtuman ta to mgo sugu din, sikan ian ka indanan to duon ian goinawa ta kandin. Di kono man no mohirap to ogtumanon ta ka mgo sugu din.
kabal
Kasablok koy to o-ogba koy.
Nò, ka Magboboot ka ogkataga to tibo no goinawa ta woy ogkataga to tibo no doromdom to Gimukud din su ka Gimukud din ka ogbuyu kandin tongod to mgo otow no nigpasakup kandin. No ka igbuyu to Gimukud din, ogkaayun on ian to koiniatan to Magboboot.
Nigkita kai ka notebook no du-on kai to ampow to lamisaan.
Nò, pogdinog to duma no mgo nanasindog no marani to krus din to nigkagi si Hisus, kagi ran to, “Pamminog kow. Og-umowon din si Elias no talagnangon dongan to kagi to Magboboot.”
Kono ki og-amut to agad nokoy no lunsura no maroot.
Ka asu ko og-anak on, itù ka ngaran to anak din.
Di ka duma no mgo otow, ian dan do ogdoromdomon ka kandan no mgo ogkoiniatan, kono no ka ogkoiniatan ni Hisu Kristu.
panalapì
bilas
Ka irung to babuy, nasingsing su nakasungkul to dalid.
balarow
woy taman to sikandin ka ogsaligan to tibo no mgo koot-otawan.”
No ka maroyow no tano no nasawaran to boni, ian ogkounawaan ka mgo otow no ogdinog to kagi to Magboboot no ogtinawo sikandan woy dio dan isabuk to taliwaro to pusung dan su maroyow ka pogdoromdom dan no ogkoiniatan dan ka malogot ian no nangnangonon. No ka sikan no mgo otow, ogparagas on to batasan dan no ogkounawa on to pogtuu ran su og-aguantoon dan ko nokoy ka ogpokouma kandan no igkabaybayari ran.
Si Inuk no ian igkahon-om no pinanganak ligkat ki Adan, impanoy rin innangon tongod to sikan no mgo otow to kagi rin to, “Ogdatong on ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no ogdumoon din ka mohon-ing no malan no mgo diwata no suguanon din
Sikan ian no nigbabantaan sikandan ko ogmonuon dan ka salapi. To nouyun on sikandan no igboli ran to tano no oghingaranan to “tano to talaghimu to kuron” oyow oghimuon dan no lobonganan to mgo otow no kono mgo Hudiu.
gusong
nanoy
Ka pogul no kayu, konò ogkasilaban ko duon kamot ta no moon-ing [ka] mgo pogulAs for the pogul tree/wood
Sikan ian to nalugoy ka pog–ugpo ni Pablo woy ki Birnabi dio to Ikuniu. No waro mog–ul–ulung sikandan to ignangonnangon to kinagian to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. No si Hisus, songo nigbulig kandan oyow duon ogkohimu ran no mgo kabolbolonganan woy ka mgo indanan no igmalogot to sikan no ignangonnangon dan to ogkohoy–uan ni Hisus ka mgo otow no ogtuu kandin.
No-uli-an on so goinawa ta to igkaallok ta to mangayow.
Tu-tuu ian ka soini no ignangon ku kaniu: ko duon lukos no ogkoiniat no ogkohimu no pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu, maroyow ka katondanan no ogkoiniatan din.
Ko ogbabaloy, ogbunsud pad no oghimu.
No to waro kinabo ku, nigkinabaan a now. To nigdaralu a, nig-uyamu a now woy ko napirisu ad, nigpanumbaloy kow koddi.’
kisak
Pogkataga ni Hisus ko nokoy ka dio to goinawa to mgo Parisiu, nig-awo sikandin dio to sikan no ugpaan no mohon-ing lagboy ka mgo otow no nanduma kandin. Nigbawian din ka tibo no nandaralu.
Du-on otow no nigpalatok din ka duma rin to tag-i, di diò dò nakapakang to alabat.
Og-u-us ka mgo batò to tirò.
No to pogdogpak pad ki Istiban to mgo batu, nig–ampu. Kagi rin to, “Hisus no Lagboy no Igbuyag ku, alapa nu ka gimukud ku dio to koykow.”
paanan
Konò ian no ubat
Kagi rin kandan to, ‘Hondio kow to pamulaanan ku to ubas woy bulig kow. Ogbayaran ku ka ogkatalabauan now to litos no igbayad.’ Nò, diad on to pamulaanan sikandan.
Nò, nasasow so goinawa to mgo hibatoon din. Kara sagboka kandan nig-inso ki Hisus to, “Buyag, kono buwa no sikoddi?”
Di ko ogdatong on si Hisus no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no ogligkat to Langit, og-awoon din on ka igkabaybayari now lagkos to igkabaybayari noy. No mohon-ing ka mabogbog no suguanon din no diwata no ogduma kandin,
Ian su inhimu to Magboboot ki Hisus ka tibo no nohimu no dio to Langit woy ka dini to tano. Nighimu rin ka tibo no kalaglagan no ogkakitaan to mgo otow woy ka kono ogkakitaan, lagkos to mgo diwata woy ka tibo no og-alap to kabogbogan no duon katondanan to ogsugu. Tibo inhimu to Magboboot ki Hisus no ian tuud din to nighimu, su oyow ogkasayo sikandin.
Ian su ka soini no mgo lawa ta, ian ogkounawaan ka baloy no ogtagtagooran ta no ogkougpaan. No nataga ki, ko ogkabinalayan on ka soini no baloy no oglibong on to tano, ogbogayan ki to Magboboot to iam no baloy no igliwan. Di ka sikan, kono oghimuon to bolad to mgo otow su ka Magboboot ka oghimu. No ka sikan no lawa ta, kono ogkaraat taman to waro katamanan dio to langit.
Agad nokoy no ogbuyuon now koddi, ko oghingaranan now ka ngaran ku, oghimuon ku soini oyow ogkasayo ka Amoy ku pinabayo koddi no anak din.
pinota
Dio nig-ugpo to kahop-atan no allow no oggawayan porom sikandin ni Satanas to ogpakasalo porom. Di waro makasalo. Songo duon dio ka mgo magintalunan no mgo ulod di nigtalipun sikandin to mgo diwata no suguanon to Magboboot.
Songo allow nigtuman si Sakarias to katondanan din no talagpanubad to Dakol no Ampuanan. Duon batasan to mgo talagpanubad no oyow ogkatagaan dan ko hondoi longod sikandan ka ogtotomog to mohomut dut tubaranan dio to solod to Dakol no Ampuanan to Magboboot. Duon ian nigpuun no naalam on si Sakarias. Nò, nigsolod sikandin dio to Dakol no Ampuanan.
Nò, inlogsad dan ka lawa ni Hisus no nigbukusan dan on to iam no tol-ob no litos to bukus to namatoy.
hari
giba
ponong
kali-a-an
Ag-aga nu ka harina
Ka Magboboot ka nig-uyag ki Hisus, no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, ligkat to kamatayon din. No sikandin ka Lagboy no Talagbantoy kanta no nigtuu no ogkoiling to mgo karniru rin. No to pogkamatoy rin, ka langosa rin ka igmalogot to sikan no sabut to Magboboot kanta to duon on iam no dalan ta dio to kandin no waro katamanan.
Soini ka Maroyow no Nangnangonon bahin ki Hisu Kristu no anak to Magboboot.
salungag
lopow
Di sikoykow atag Titu, og-awoson to ka pog-anad nu, ogkouyun to tu-tuu ian no ingkaanad.
lalaron
pulapula
ogpangabangan ku ro ka sikan no balu su ogkaaras-aras a to ungod oglibonglibong no ogsasasow koddi taman to ogkouling-ol ad.’ ”
Nò, og-inso a kaniu, mgo sulod, ko nokoy ka salo ku kaniu? Ka batasan ku dio to kaniu, nokog-unawa ro to batasan ku no dio a to mgo nigtuu no dio to duma no mgo lunsud. Di ian do batasan ku dio to kaniu no waro mokog-unawa to sikan no batasan ku dio to duma no mgo lunsud so waro a nigbuyu kaniu to og-awoson to pog-ugpo ku. Ko salo ku pa kaniu ka sikan, pasaylua a now ro!
komù
Ka nignangonnangon dio to mgo suguanon ni Hisus, ian si Maria Magdalina woy si Huana, woy si Maria no ian inoy ni Santiago. Lagkos, duon dod duma no mgo boi no nakaruma kandan no songo nignangon.
Sikaniu nokani, nigmaroot kow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot. No nohimu kow no usig din su ligkat to mgo maroot no doromdom now woy maroot no mgo hinimuan now.
o ogpa-abaton ta ka doun to alik-ik, songo olad dò.
dabokdabok
dapit
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Kono no kai to kalibutan ka koddi no pogsugu. Ko kai to soin no kalibutan ka pogsugu ku, pokog-ogot-ogot ka mgo sakup ku oyow kona a porom ogkapurut to mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu. Di kona a no Igbuyag kai to soin no kalibutan.”
tigkan
Soini pad ka ngaran to dangob no nig-alam din: si Andres, si Pilipi, si Bartolomi, si Matiu, si Tomas, si Santiago no anak ni Alpiu, si Tadiu woy si Simon no oghingaranan dan to Siloti.
Di agad hontow ka og-inum to sikan no woig no igbogoy ku, konad on ogkoibog no oghutuk to og-inum. Sikan su ka sikan no woig no igbogoy ku ka woig no igkouyag no waro katamanan. Ogkounawa ian to sagboka no sobsob no og-ugwak dio to diralom nu no kono ogkootian.”
takorog
No kagi to igbuyag din kandin to, ‘No sikoykow, ogbogayan ka to katondanan to og-alap to lalimma no lunsud.’ ”
gpupu ki to noinug no katumbal to songo supa rò ka bogas.
No ka sikan no igbuyag, niggawayan woy nigbayadbayaran ka mgo kaap–apuan ta. Woy pigpogos din sikandan to oyow ogpoongkoran dan ka mgo anak dan dio to tano oyow ogkamatoy.
Kono now ilingi sikandan, su ka Amoy tanow no Magboboot, nataga on no tahan to og-awoson now to waro kow pad nigbuyu kandin.
Kasasowsasow to mangayow
amò
No ogbuyu a to Magboboot to oyow ligkat to maroyow no pogdumaruma tanow no ogligkat to pogtuu ta ki Hisus, ogkatimulan ka pogsabut ta to tibo no karoyawon no imbogoy to Magboboot kanta no ogligkat to nasagboka kinow on ki Kristu.
Nò, nigsasindog ka Labow to mgo talagpanubad woy nig-inso ki Hisus to, “Waro igtabak nu to soini no inbayung koykow?”
Nò, nigkagi si Hisus to mgo hibatoon din no kagi rin to, “Mohirap ian to datu no mgo otow to ogpasakup to pogsugu to Magboboot.
sukat
Sikan ian to ogkarago a lagboy no ogpokouwang ad on to igkarago ku. Dakol ka im–imanan ku su, agad ogkamatoy a
Sikan no kagi no nigpasulat to Magboboot ki Isaias ka kono dan ogpakatuu. No duon dod dangob no kagi no impasulat ki Isaias. Kagi,
Bantoy kow woy ampu kow nasi oyow kono kow ogkool-ologan to mgo pakoid. Duon panagana to goinawa now to oghimu to maroyow, di malotoy ka mgo lawa now to oghimu to soini.”
Igpaalap ku koykow, Timoteo, ka soini no sulat ku. No indakoli ku sikoykow to goinawa ku su nounawa ka to tu-tuu ka ian no anak ku. Ogbuyu a to Magboboot no Amoy woy si Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta oyow ogbuligan ka woy ogkohoy-uan ka, woy to oyow ogbogayan ka ran to maawang no goinawa nu.
su nigligkat a to kapunganan ni Binhamin no ian sagboka to mgo anak to kaap-apuan tanow no si Israil. Lagboy a ian no Hudiu, woy Hudiu dod ka mgo kaap-apuan ku. Ko wawalu pad no allow ligkat to pogkootow ku, nigtuli ad. Woy nigtuman a to mgo Balaod no inggalat ni Moisis su nohimu ad on no Parisiu.
dingil
Sampulù koy no otow ka ogpagagantioy to ogkamot to tu-id.
Ka goinawa ku ian, mgo sulod, to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu woy to oyow ogtokoron now ka dakol no goinawa to Magboboot kaniu, woy to oyow ogkabuligan kow to Gimukud to Magboboot oyow maroyow ka pogparumdumooy now kandin. Kanak no si Pablo.
Di ko si Galiu on ka gobirnador to probinsia to Girisia, nigmouy–uyunoy ka mgo Hudiu to oyow ogpoogotan dan porom si Pablo. Sikan ian no nigdakop dan on si Pablo no nig–alap dan on sikandin dio to husayanan dio to tankaan ni Galiu.
lumbuk
domol
Binuta ka ogsabukan to mgo otow to kalaglagan dan. Konò maga-an ogkamolù ko ogtabuntabunon.
Di ko igbogoy to Magboboot, ogparagason noy ro porom ka pog-anad noy no ogpakahogot to pogtuu now.
salapuyan
Ian su nigboboot ka Magboboot to oyow ogkabatukan on ka tibo no mgo otow to niglop-ang sikandan to kagi rin. No ian su oyow ogkohimu no ogkakohoy-uan din ka agad hondoi no otow.
Di duon nigsolod no mgo Hudiu no taga Asia. Maroyow porom ko nigduma pad sikandan oyow sikandan poron ka ogtangko koykow Buyag ko duon ig–ogot dan kanak,” kagi ni Pablo.
otow
No ka sikan no igpanganad, ogkaalap-alap to mgo otow no og-iling to magtu-tuu dokad di ubat ka ig-anad dan, no kono ogmasakit so goinawa ran to mgo batasan dan su ka goinawa ran, konad oggoram su ian ogkounawaan ka laplap to ayam no nabanosan on to nigbaga no putow.
Uwangan ki to mo-init.
Panu-id ki man dò kunto-on
Ian pighonduon ni Husi alunggun ki Maria su duon ingkasulat dongan to Balaod to Magboboot to, “Ka tibo no bato no lukos no panganoy no anak to mgo Hudiu woy ka tibo no panganoy no lukosan no ayam, ogpoindanan no igbogoy now to Magboboot.”
ngalap
Nò, ka sikan no mgo hibatoon ni Hisus no nigsugu din dio to mgo lunsud, nan-uli sikandan dio ki Hisus. Nigbatbatan dan to tibo no pighimu ran, mgo in-anad dan.
bitbit
Ko ogkatagaan pa to tagtuun to baloy ko kon-u oglopow ka ogpanakow, ogpanagana porom sikandin su oyow kono ogpokolopow ka takawon dio to baloy rin.
silang
Ko ogpanguras, ogpataga on to oghondiad on sikandin.
No songo nigdinog ku ka tibo no dio to langit woy ka dio to tano, woy ka dio to diralom to tano, woy ka dio to dagat no songo og-oopad to, “Ogsayoon ta ka sikan no ogpinpinnuu to pinnuuanan din to pandatuan woy ka Nati no Karniru. Ogtahuron tanow woy ogdakolon ta ka ngaran dan to waro katamanan su mabogbog lagboy woy ogpakalabow sikandan.” Sikan ka kagi ran.
Ko moon-ing ka lawo-lawò to talubagì, ogpanguiton ta to walis ka baloy to talubagì oyow ogka-awò.
Nò, ian ka allow no nigbobootan to mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu to ogpohimatayan dan si Hisus.
panikluud
No tu-tuu ian to dakol ka goinawa now to tibo no mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisus dio to agad hondoi to probinsia to Masidonia. Di ogbuyu koy kaniu mgo sulod, to oyow ogtimulon now ka goinawa now kandan.
“Kono kow ogsumansuman to koddi ian ka ogdiklamo kaniu dio to Amoy ku no Magboboot. Si Moisis no im-imanan now to ogpangabang kaniu, sikandin ka ogdiklamo kaniu.
Nigtabak ka Lagboy no Igbuyag no si Hisus to pananglitan. Kagi rin, “Hondoi ka suguanon no ogkasaligan woy duon katouan din? Sikandin ian ka ogbogayan to katondanan to igbuyag din to ogpanalad to koonon to duma rin no mgo suguanon kara allow ko oghipanow ka igbuyag dan,” kagi ni Hisus.
Pogkaponga woy ni Pablo to innangonnangon dan no nigkagi on si Santiago to, “Mgo sulod, pamminog kow pa to ignangon ku kaniu.
hinogò
Kono now doromdoma no nighondini ad to soin no kalibutan oyow og-ongkoran ku ka Balaod no ingalat kanta ni Moisis woy ko ka impasulat to Magboboot dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi din. Di atag, ian inhondini ku to kalibutan oyow ogkatuman ka in-anad to Balaod, mgo kagi to mgo talagnangon.
Nò, duon talinga now pamminog kow.”
tawad
pangiak
Nataga kinow to litos ian ka pogboot to Magboboot no oglogparan din ka mgo otow no oghimu to sikan no mgo maroot no mgo batasan. Dokad di, sikaniu no ognangon to maroot ian ka oghimuon to mgo otow no oghimu to sikan no mgo batasan, kono kow songo ogpakasalsalia to logpad to Magboboot, su ogsamilian now ka maroot no hinimuan to dangob no otow, di songo maroot dod ka kaniu no mgo batasan. Sikan ian, ko ogsamilian now ka dangob no otow, songo ogkasamilian now rod ka kaniu no mgo batasan.
tangkob
iria
Ka innangon ku to boi to, "Ogpalayuron ta pad ka goinawa ta. Oghimu ki to sabut to songo tu-id ko darua no tu-id no ko konò ogkahalin ka goinawa nu to lo-in no lukos, ogkato-oran ku sikoykow to ogka-asawa."
songkil
Ian su ungod nigbuyu kanami to oyow oghooan noy sikandan oyow songo ogpakabulig sikandan to sikan no mgo nigtuu.
Ka otow no ogkapogkot on ka pa-a rin, og-ilud-ilud ka poghipanow rin.
Ko hondo-i ka taliwarò to tanò, ian ka pusod,
Ko oglanog ka woig, songo kausiloman ka og-uran no ogpangubus to pantad.
Songo ogkounawa ro ka mgo maroyow no mgo hinimuan, ogkakitaan do, di agad to kono pad kuntoon ogkakitaan, duon dod allow no ogkakitaan on.
su mohon-ing kow ka niglogpad kandin woy litos on.
Nataga ki to tu-tuu ian ka soini su kinagian to Magboboot to, “Kanak ka oglogpad. Kanak ka ogsuli.” Woy songo innangon din to, “Ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ka ogpakaboboot to mgo otow no impasakup din ko oglogparan woy ko kono.”
banhow
Napongan to sikan, nignangonan ni Hisus ka mgo otow to pananglitan din. Kagi rin, “Duon songo otow no nigpamulaan din ka tano din to ubas. Pogkaponga rin nigpougpaan din on to mgo otow ka sika pinamula rin. Nighow-as sikandin dio to mariu no ugpaan no malugoy ka pog-ugpo din dio.”
sokod
“Sikan ian,” kagi, “indani now ka ignangon ku kaniu. Kono kow ogkasasow ko nokoy ka tabak now dio ko ogkatuman on ka innangon ku,
Ko ogdangdangon, ogdalapon ta to hauy ka doun su oglay-obon su oyow ogtongos to to ko-onon.
likag
gisì
Du-on durulison to in-ampow to ngipon to agoloy no ogko-iling to siropin. Ogngaranan to ukaba.
Sikaniu, no mgo otow no malopot ka pogdoromdom now, nabbutud kow. Hondoi naan ka og-umalagon ta, ka bulawan buwa woy ko ka Ampuanan buwa no ian malogot no ogpakabogoy to pogkamatuwarong to bulawan?
agad pila
Nakasumpalit ka hibato-on no nigbaluy on no kayu.
iling
Sikan ian, kono kow ogpamminog to mgo otow no og-apul poron kaniu ko kono kow ogpaagad-agad to ig-anad dan tongod ko nokoy ka nahan dan no litos no ogkakoon now woy ko ogkoinum now, woy ko tongod to mgo pagkoonan dan, mgo allow no nahan dan no og-awoson now to og-indanan, woy ko mgo pogsayo dan ko ogsilo man do ka bulan, woy ko duon allow no oghimoloy no igpatuman kaniu.
Ko naponga no nigkoon sikandan, si Hudas Iskarioti, no sagboka to sika sampulu woy darua no hibatoon ni Hisus, nighondio to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad oyow ogpanabod ki Hisus.
balikid
Nò, nigkagi si Pedro to, “Buyag, nig-ongkoran noy on ka tibo oyow ogdumaruma koy koykow. Nokoy ka igbogoy to Magboboot kanami?”
Nò, duon mabogbog no mgo kabolbolonganan no oghimuon to sikan no igkaruwa no magintalunan. Ian su ogkohimu rin to ogpoulug to hapuy no ogligkat dio to langit no igpakita to tibo no mgo otow.
kiloy
No ligkat to sagboka ro no otow, nighimu to Magboboot ka tibo to agad nokoy otawa, woy insabuk din sikandan dio to agad hondoi kai to ampow to tano. Sikandin ka nigboboot dongan ko hondoi din isabuk ka mgo ugpaan to mgo otow woy sikandin dod ka impanoy nigboboot ko songo monu kalugoy ka pog–ugpo to mgo otow dio to sikan no mgo ugpaan dan.
bugtung
Og-alikon, sikan ka bunsud to ogbalikid. Og-alikon on oyow ogkaliid on.
Ogbuligan ta ka otow no malotoy to ogkitkit oyow ogpaka-anad to oghihipanow oyow ogpoko-orol on.
Ka batò no ogko-omaw, ogligkat to pogko-otow rin taman to ogkabuyag on sikandin no omaw rod ian sikandin no konò ogpakakagi.
Ka mgo gumawan to sikan no lunsud, ungod ogkapulasan no konad ian oglokoban, su warad on marusilom dio.
balungkag
Ka suloy, ko gipud on, ogpulpulan tad su og-awo-on ta ka namolù. Sikan ka igpulpul su oyow matulid.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandin to, “Kono ka pad ogpakasabut to lituk to oghimuon ku kuntoon. Di uromo, ogpakasabut ka.”
Nigdinog ka mgo Parisiu to molmohon-ing pad kun ka mgo ogkasakup ni Hisus no ogpabautismuan din to mgo ogkasakup ni Huan.
dangdang
Nò, nig-insaan ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din no kagi rin to, “Nakasabut kow to soin no innangon ku kaniu?” “Hoo, nakasabut koy on,” ka tabak dan.
sanglit
utang
Waro malugoy no nighondio si Hisus mgo hibatoon din to baloy ni Libi to ogkoon. Nig-amut kandan ka mohon-ing no mgo talagsukut to buhis tagkos to mgo otow no tahan no pigsawoy sikandan no songo nigkoon dio.
Agad to waro sagboka no salo ni Hisus, nigpaabin to Magboboot kandin ka mgo salo ta oyow si Hisus on ka niglogparan. Ian su oyow ligkat to pogkasagboka ta kandin, ka igkamatuwarong to Magboboot, songo igpaabin kanta.
Ka atolug to manuk no buguk konò ogpigsò su warò natibug.
No kagi ni Pedro, to “Sikan dod ka Hisus no nig–uyag on to Magboboot ligkat to kamatayon din. No tibo koy ogpakapamalogot to sikan.
“Di tongod to duon ian pogkootawi to mgo nammatoy, ogkatagaan ta to duon pogkootawi to mgo nammatoy ligkat to ingkasulat dongan ni Moisis. Insulat din ka nigkita rin dongan no niglogdog ka sagboka no malopot no kayu di waro matutung. To soini no nangnangonon oghingaranan ni Moisis ka Magboboot no, kandin dod ian ka Magboboot to mgo kaap-apuan din no si Abraham, woy ki Isaak woy si Hakub.
Poglogsad ni Hisus, nigtagbu sikandin to lukos no pigbusawan no dio nigpuun sikandin to mgo pilang no lobonganan.
Di ka igpang-anad now ian ko duon otow no duon igkabulig din porom to amoy rin woy inoy din, no ogkagion din to amoy rin woy ko inoy rin to, ‘Ka igbulig ku kaniu porom, kono ku igkabogoy kaniu su igtubad ku ro ian dio to Magboboot.’
Nabugsong ko du-on kinagian no konò ogka-ayun.
Nigsugu ni Hisus ka mgo otow to, “Pinnuu kow kai to tano.” Nò, nigkomkom din ka sika papitu no malison woy nigpasalamatan din ka Magboboot. Pogpanlotiblotib din ka paan, imbogoy rin to mgo hibatoon din oyow iglogoblogob dan to mgo otow. No pigtuman soini to mgo hibatoon din.
buriak
Di, doromdoma now ka nokani no iam kow mabat-awi to pogtuu now to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon. Mohon-ing ka nig-aguanta now no igkabaybayari now, no agad mohirap, waro kow maroog.
Soini ka kagi now ko og-ampu kow. ‘Amoy noy dio to langit, Ka ig-ampu noy koykow ian to ogtahuron ka ngaran nu.
higad
Nokani no waro kow pad nigtuu, nounawa kow to mgo nammatoy su waro pad kouyagan now no waro katamanan. Ian su waro kow pad nigpaagad-agad to innangon to Magboboot, woy su maroot pad ka mgo batasan now.
buliung
Nabuyagoy on ka homoy dio to liang; nabus-ug on no nakatkat dio to tano.
Ka library, ian ka nakasagop to nalapoy  no woig.
Ka mgo lugì to tabunan to takubung, ogpoglawanglawangon diò to diralom to oghimuan dan to salag.
Ogtahuron koy to songo otow di ogdoisokon koy to duma. Woy ogsamilian koy to songo otow di ogsayoon koy to duma. No agad to tu-tuu ian ka kagi noy di og-ilingan koy to mgo ubaton.
kimpit
Dokad di su waro ku kitaa dio ka sulod ta no si Titu, nasasow a lagboy. Sikan ian to nigpanuguntugun a to mgo nigtuu dio, no nighipanow ad on no oghondio to Masidonia.
Mgo sulod, maroyow ko ogkohoy-uan kow tibo to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu. Hoo ian.
kagi
Pokogdagkot ka tanò to langit.
Nignangonan kud sikandan to innangon nu di nasundug sikandan to mgo waro nigtuu to warad paginlabot to soin no kalibutan. Ogkounawa ian koddi, kona a ogpaginlabot to soin no kalibutan.
halù
Di ka sagboka no otow no nig-ogot to duma rin, pigkois din si Moisis to kagi rin to, ‘Manio to sikoykow ka ogboboot kanami? Bak ko sikoykow ka talaghusay noy.
ni
Duon dod dio ka maralom no balun no pighimu ni Hakub. Nò, nigpinnuu no oghimoloy si Hisus marani to balun su naboloy to poghipanow ran no mariu no marani on ogmougtu ko nigdatong.
Ian su nohimu kinow on no mgo sumpul to lawa rin.
talipid
tagarapow
Kagi ni Pedro kandin to, “Inias, si Hisu Kristu ka og–uyag to lawa nu. Onow kad on. Woy tapirad ka pighibatan nu.” Inogo on sikan no nokoonow on woy nakasasindog.
bonnal
Woy ogpoomotan ku ka oghimuon ku su oyow ogkabuligan ka goinawa now. No ka sikan, ogligkat to ogkasagboka kow su ogmarakdakoloy kow to goinawa. No ian ogkohimu ka sikan su oyow ogkasabutan now on ian lagboy ka sikan no ingkaanad kaniu tongod ki Kristu. Sikan ian ka ingkoholos nokani no impohitaga on to Magboboot kanta.
api
Sikoddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan, igpakita ku kaniu to duon katondanan ku kai to kalibutan to ogpasaylu to mgo salo to mgo otow.” Nò, nignangonan ni Hisus ka otow no nigkolog ka lawa rin to, “Koykow Sulod, puruta nu ka hibatanan nu woy uli kad on.”
Ogkounawa ka mgo otow,” kagi ni Hisus, “ka maroyow no otow, maroyow ka oghimuon din su ogpuun to maroyow no nakatagu dio to goinawa rin, di ka maroot no otow, songo maroot ka oghimuon din su ogpuun to maroot no nakatagu to goinawa rin. Malogot soini su agad nokoy ka nakatagu to goinawa ta, ian ka ogpakalibuwas to bo-bo ta.”
Nò, sikaniu no duma, songo duon ig-udling ku kaniu. Di sikanak ka nigligkatan to soini su waro kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. No ogkagian ku ka mgo lukos no nigtuu on no duon asawa ran no waro pad nigtuu. Kono ta og-ongkoran ka asawa ta no waro pad nigtuu ko ogkoiniatan din to og-ugpo.
dangat
ligot
No to maallow woy marusilom, ogbantayan dan ka mgo gumawan to lunsud. Di nanangonan on si Saulo to tuud dan to oggopasan sikandin oyow oghimatayan porom.
No ian tabak dan ka kagi ni Hisus no wa sapari sikandan; nigbogoy on.
oyow ogkatuman ka kagi ni Isaias no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan no nasulat to Tahan no Kasulatan. Kagi, “Buyag, hontow buwa ka nigtuu to nangnangon noy?” “Hontow buwa ka nakasabut to impapitow nu to koykow no kabogbogan?”
ko-on
Agad hontow no ognangonnangon to, “Ogdumaruma a to Magboboot,” og-awoson din to og-unugon din ka batasan ni Hisus.
olog
Ka sikan no kamatayon, ian ka ogpakabohog kanta to oyow kono tad ogkoiniatan ka mgo maroot no batasan no ogkounawa to kandan no goinawa.
subla
Ka otow no  ogpalawod to gakit din ka ogtuwal, ogbantayan din oyow konò ogpakabundal ka lobut to gakit to  dalama, oyow konò ogkabalikid.
Woy duon dangob no impasulat to Magboboot no kagi rin to, “Nataga ka Magboboot to waro pulus ka sikan no pogdoromdom to mgo otow no natouan to soini no kalibutan.”
No litos ko igkanangon ta to si Libi, no ian kaap-apuan to sikan no nabogayan to mgo igkasampulu to pog-ugpo to mgo otow, nakalagkos to sikan no pogbogoy ni Abraham ki Milkisidik dongan to kandin no igkasampulu no baad.
Duon insulat ku kaniu nokani to kono kid ogdumaruma to sikan no mgo otow no oghimu to maroot to kono no asawa ran.
kuyab
Ka woig, mo-obul.
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Wow kaniu no mgo otow no waro pogtuu now, dakol ka sayop now. Kapilaan a pad dini to kaniu? Kapilaan a ro ogpakaantus kaniu?” Kagi ni Hisus, “Alapa nu ka anak nu kai to koddi.”
Nig-agpas niglibong ka dalaga dio ki Hirodis. Kagi rin, “Ogkuon ku kai kuntoon ka ulu ni Huan no Talagbautismu no pasabuk nu to palanggana.”
kibol
bokas
Nighimata si Hisus no nig-inso din to, “Manio to ogkahallok kow? Molintok naan ka pogsalig now koddi?” Nig-onow on si Hisus no nigparagas no nigsasindog no nigsaparan din ka kalamag woy luwak no nighagtong soini no warad on kalamag woy luwak woy nigmalongon on.
No nigtulin si Hisus woy nigtimulan on ka ogkatouan din. Songo nigdakol on ka ingkarago to Magboboot woy to mgo otow kandin.
bantoy
ayun
dolis
No ka nohimu ki Dorkas, ingkanangonnangon on to tibo no mgo otow no dio to Hupi, no mohon–ing kandan ka nigtuu on ki Hisus.
boloy
Ka igparakoldakol to songo otow, ko diò to alukuyon, ogbabansagon sikandin to ogkagi to, "Koddì ian no ngaran ka ogpokohonat to duma ta no ogkalonod to problima."
Dongan, no nabogayan ka mgo pinanganak ni Israil to sikan no Balaod to Magboboot, ka mgo talagpanubad to mgo pinanganak ni Libi woy pinanganak dod ni Aaron ka nigsaligan to Magboboot to pog-alap to sikan ian no Balaod din. Di ka nighimu to sikan no mgo talagpanubad, ko nakatood pa to og-ayun to goinawa ta dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, waro poron awosa to duon loin no lunsud no talagpanubad no ogkaalam to Magboboot no ogligkat to pogpanubad ni Milkisidik, no kono atag ogligkat to pogpanubad ni Aaron.
sipsip
kalawag
Nokoy naan ka mgo diwata no suguanon din? Ka lawa ran, ogkoiling to mgo gimukud no kono ogkakitaan. Di talagbulig sikandan to Magboboot no ogsuguon din dio to sikan no mgo otow no ogtuu on kandin to oyow ogkapangabangan on to mgo salo dan.
Dakoldakol man ka pulus to otow to sika ayam. Omunaan kono ki ogpakalapas to Balaod ko ogbuligan ta ka otow agad Allow to Oghimoloy.”
Kagi ni Ananias, “Buyag, mohon–ing ka ogdinogon ku no mgo maroot no nighimu to sikan no otow no nigbayadbayad to mgo otow no nigtuu koykow no dio to Hirusalim.
salangat
Duon mgo otow no songo nigtugon dio to sikan no lamisaan no nakarinog to kagi ni Hisus. Nò, kagi rin ki Hisus, “Dakol ka igkarago to mgo otow no ogpakatugon uromo dio to pagkoonan dio to Pandatuan to Magboboot.”
Kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandan, “Sikoddi, nig-alam ad kaniu no sampulu woy darua. Di duon sagboka kaniu no sakup ni Satanas.”
tiktik
silak
No ko dio pad to solod to baloy, ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy tibo no duma no duon katondanan, nigpoin-insooy sikandan ko duon igbayung dan ki Hisus oyow ogkohimu to ogpohimatayan dan sikandin. Di waro.
Ka kinagian no amba-an, darua no otow ko tatolu, og-opus-opus to og-ambò.
Woy oghimatayan ku ka mgo sakup to sikan no boi. No ka tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu kanak dio to agad hondoi, ogkataga ran to natagaan ku ka tibo to agad nokoy no nakatagu to goinawa to mgo otow woy ko nokoy ka ogkoiniatan dan no oghimuon. No duon igbogoy ku to tag sagboka kaniu ka igsokod to batasan now ko ka igsayo woy ka iglogpad.
Ian ku ipouli si Ipaproditu dio to kaniu su ogkasampot lagboy sikandin kaniu tibo, woy su nasasow on ian su natagaan din to nigdinog kow to nigdaralu sikandin.
Nò, su nalugoy koy on dio to nabayaan noy, ogmalogon on to mgo barku dio to dagat su ogkoumaan on to tigbagyu. Sikan ian to duon imbohog ni Pablo kandan.
pos-ok
Sikan ian to, ka mgo otow no nigtuu to innangonnangon ni Pedro, nigpabautismu on. No to sikan do no allow, duon buwa tatolu no malan no mgo otow ka nigtuu ki Hisus no nokogdumaruma on to mgo otow no tahan on no nigtuu.
No ian to in–agpas ku impahatod si Pablo dio to koykow su nanangonan ad to duon mgo otow no nigmouy–uyunoy to oggopasan sikandin. No nigsuguan ku ka mgo otow no nigbayung ki Pablo to oyow songo oghondio koykow oyow ognangonan dan sikoykow ko nokoy ka ingkabolu dan kandin.” Sikan do ka tagu to sulat no igpaalap to gobirnador.
Pogpitow rin, dakol ka goinawa ni Hisus to sikan no lukos. Kagi rin kandin, “Kulang ka pad to sagboka no oghimuon nu porom. Uli kad on woy ipanaliu nu ka tibo no kalaglagan nu to salapi no ipambogoy nu ka salapi to publi no mgo otow. Ko ogpakatuman ka to sikan, dakol on ka igdasag nu dio to langit no ugpaan to Magboboot. Ko impambogoy nud on, libong ka dii woy ogdurumaruma kad on koddi.”
Ka mgo hibatoon din, waro pad makasabut to sikan no allow to nohimu dan. Di ko nouyag on si Hisus no nig-uli on dio to langit, nakaroromdom sikandan to soini naan ka kagi to Tahan no Kasulatan no natuman on to sikan no allow no nig-untud si Hisus to nati to asno.
Duon boi dio to sikan no mohon-ing no mgo otow no nigpamminog ki Hisus. To nigkagi pad si Hisus to sikan no kagi rin, nigpaagbotan to boi ka kagi rin ki Hisus to, “Kapulusan ka sikan no boi no niglosutan woy nigpasusu koykow.”
Ko og-anad ki to batò to ogsulat to ngaran din, ognangonan ta to, Oghondu-onon nu to ogsulat. Nalagkos to lituk ka igpayag ta to pog-anad.
Sikan ian, ogbuyu a kaniu to oyow og-unugan now ka batasan ku.
anggigison
tobal
An-anayan, og-umawon nu. Ko konò oggoram, oggongonan ta oyow ogka-antog.
Narago sikandan no pinountud dan on sikandin to balutu ran. Pogkountud on ni Hisus, nakaratong on to nigduungan dan.
Ko duon otow no nahan din no ogkapangabangan poron to mgo salo din su ligkat ko nokoy ka ogkatuman din no mgo batasan, labowlabow pad ka kanak no pogtuman
Ko og-aguantoon ta ka igkabaybayari ta, ogkarago ka Magboboot kanta. No ligkat to ogkataga ki to ogkarago ka Magboboot kanta, ogpokoiman-iman ki to ogpakatood ka tuud din kanta.
Ka sika abalangon, ungod oglibonglibong taman to ogkapurut din ka ogbuyu-on din. Ogko-iling to ogkapogos ka ogbuyu-on din
Pogpitow ku, niglamposan to ikug din ka igkatatolu no baad to mgo bituon no dio to langit woy indogpak din kai to tano. Pogkaponga to sikan, nigsasindog sikandin dio to tangkaan to boi no nighayuran to oyow ogdawion din on poron ka bato ko iglosut on.
kawwilìn
Ogtagaran ta to tatolu no bulan woy ta ogpitawon ka piggalung ta ko du-on on alibutod.
Nigtabak dan to, “Tuu ka ro to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus no ogkapangabangan ka to salo nu woy songo ogkapangabangan on ka tibo no mgo otow no og–ugpo to baloy nu.
Ka Magboboot doka nigbogoy to Balaod woy sikandin do no sagboka ka duon katondanan to ogboot kanta. Waro loin no ogpakapangabang woy ko ogpakalogpad kanta. Di waro atag katondanan ta to ogboboot to duma ta ko litos ka oghimuon din woy ko kono.
Ian su nokani, duon otow no si Tiudas no nig–unoy–unoy nighimu to katondanan din. No ogmarani buwa to hop–at no gatus ka mgo otow no nigdumaruma kandin. Di pogkalugoy, pighimatayan si Tiudas no nokogsuwoysuwoy ro ka mgo otow no nigsakup kandin. No naawo do man ka tuud din.
“Ogkounawa rod ka batasan to mgo otow to sikan no allow no ogpakitoon a no Kakoy to Koot-otawan,” kagi ni Hisus,
sial
Ian su agad nokoy no inholos kuntoon, duon allow no ogkakitaan do woy waro talasob no kono ogkatagaan.
Sikan ian no nigdakop dan ka anak dut tagtuun woy indogpak dan sikandin dio to libuwasan to pinamula to ubas woy nighimatayan dan sikandin.”
Nò, ko oghimu a to kono ku ogkoiniatan, kono ogligkat to tu-tuu no goinawa ku di ogligkat atag to tahan no maroot no koiniatan to lawa ku.
Dio ta pad ognangnangonon ki Abraham no ian kaap-apuan ta no mgo Hudiu.
Sikan ka otow no mabukalò ka ogpangakagikagi ka warò ig-ulung-ulung din to ognangonnangon.
guguli
An-anayan, og-umawon nu. Ko konò oggoram, oggongonan ta oyow ogka-antog.
Di ka otow no ogparagason ka poghimu rin to mgo salo, sakup dod ni Satanas su ligkat to an-anayan, batasan ni Satanas to oghimu to salo. Di ian inghondini ni Hisus to soini no kalibutan su oyow oggulakon din ka mgo hinimuan ni Satanas.
Ko nig-alig ki to Magbobo-ot, indakoli ki to goinawa to Magbobo-ot. Kandin dò ka nig-alig.
Kagi ni Tomas kuwo kandin, “Buyag, waro koy mataga ko hondoi ka ogdolog. Ogmomonu koy naan,” kagi rin, “oyow ogpakabatuk koy to dalan nu?”
siwang
Ma-agbot ka pogdinug.
Ko og-angayon ka otow, ogdoipagon ku to gakit.
lokò
Ka lawa to bibi, oglimuron no ogpagbolon no ogkuyaban ka hapuy.
“Ko nigtugunan kow dio to pagkoonan to kasal, ko kow og-alam to mgo maroyow lagboy no pinnuuanan su songo kuwo no duon dod otow no mabantug pad kaniu no songo natugunan to sikan no pagkoonan
hapun
Sikan ian to pig-abin a to Magboboot oyow oghimuon a rin no suguanon din to oyow ogpakanangonnangon a woy to oyow ogkohimu a no talag-anad to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus.
tigpù
Woy og-awoson to oyow waro maroot no kagi no oglibuwas to mgo bo-bo ta. Di ian do no litos no ogkagion ta ka maroyow ro no ogpakabulig to goinawa to duma ta no og-awoson dan. No ian to oyow ogkabuligan ka mgo otow no ogpamminog.
Nigbabansagon kandan to pogtabak dan to, “Himatayi now; ipalansang nu dio to krus.” Nig-inso si Pilatu, “Ogpohimatayan ku ka kaniu no Labow no Igbuyag?” Nigtabak ka mgo igbuyag to talagpanubad. Kagi, “Warad duma no labow no igbuyag noy. Si Sisar do ka labow no igbuyag noy.”
boros
Tambabò koy to konò ogkaliwan.
Nò, nokouma on ka allow to pog-anak ni Elisabit no lukos ka in-anak din.
burin
tinabi
Ian su duon kagi to Magboboot dio to Tahan no Kasulatan to, “Duon Otow no nig-alam ku no ian ogkounawaan ka mahal no batu. Igsabuk ku sikandin dio to lunsud to Sion. Ogkounawa sikandin to makogal no batu no ogpounturan to baloy. Agad hontow no ogsalig kandin, kono ogkasipod.”
Ko nigkita ni Hisus ka sika no hibatoon din no dakol so goinawa rin kandin no ogsasindog dio to longod to inoy rin, nigkagian din ka inoy rin bahin to sikan no hibatoon din. Kagi, “Ino, sikandin on ka anak nu.”
manokal
alas
solod
Nò, ka sika darua no otow, nigsasindog woy nighipanow no niglibong man do dio to Hirusalim no dio dan makitoi ka sampulu woy sagboka no hibatoon ni Hisus duma no mgo loin no karumaan dan no nalimudlimud.
No ko ogbogas on to soini no sunud no tuid, maroyow, di ko kono ogbogas, balagad ko igpapolod nud on,’ kagi to talagbantoy to pinamula,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ogkapulusan kow ko ligkat to nigtuu kow koddi no duon mgo otow no oglomotan kow ran woy ko ogkabaybayaran kow ran woy kow ogmarooton kow nikandan to kandan no wangal, duon dod man igkarago now.
alip-ip
Ko ogpitow ki to pitsa to bulan, awoson no og-indanan ta ka liwak to warò ogpakabalabag oyow ogkatuman to poglibulung.
Ka mgo manigo-on no mgo buyag on, kandan ka du-on katondanan to mgo ugpa-an.
“Sikoddi ka lawa to bunal to ubas woy sikaniu ka mgo sugpang. Kaniu no ogpalinggalat dini to koddi woy songo ogpalinggalat a dio to kaniu, ogpakapamogas kow to marasig su ko wara a dio to kaniu, waro ogkohimu now.
Woy nakarani kid on ki Hisus no nohimu no dalan ta dio to Magboboot, woy nakarani ki to langosa rin no nigtulalug dio to krus no immalogot to sikan no iam no sabut oyow ogkohoy-uan ki to Magboboot. No ka sikan, madmaroyow to langosa ni Abil no nigbuyu to pogsuli.
Nò, ka sikan no mgo pogbuyagon, pigtokod a ran to nigbogayan ad on to Magboboot to katondanan ku to pog-alap-alap to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon dio to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. No songo nounawa rod to pogtokod dan ki Pedro to songo nigbogayan to kandin no katondanan to pog-alap-alap to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon dio to mgo Hudiu.
batuk
apù to bu-ol
Sikan no otow no nigtuu to Anak to Magboboot ogkouyag ka sikan no otow no waro katamanan dio to langit. Di sikan no otow no kono ogbabali to Anak din, kono ogkouyag dio. Kono ogkaawo ka igkabou to Magboboot to sikan no mgo otow taman to waro katamanan.”
Ka sikan no otow no ogpakakagi to loin no kinagian no ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot, ian din ogkagian ka Magboboot. Kono din ogkagian ka mgo otow su kono ogpakasabut sikandan. Di duon igpanangonnangon to Gimukud to Magboboot kandin di ka lituk, ogpokoholos.
No ka maroot no mgo batasan dan, ogpakasipodsipod poron kandan. No ian ogkounawaan ka mgo luwak to dagat no ogkasiu-siu no ogpakaalap to maligsom ko ogpakarapig on dio to pantad. Woy ogkounawa rod sikandan to mgo bituon no nonoulug on no konad on oglayag. Ian su duon impanagana on to Magboboot no maralom woy marusilom lagboy no ogkougpaan dan to waro katamanan.
Tibo no mgo nigkoon, lalima no libu no mgo lukos no waro pad nakalagkos pogsool ka mgo boi woy ka mgo bato.
lagak
irob
Na-ula-an to miow ka asukal.
sukat
Nangoni koy, tongod to Balaod ta, ko ogkaayun ko ogbayaran ta ka buhis ta dio ki Sisar no punuan to mgo taga Ruma? Ogbayaran tad buwa woy ko kono tad?”
Agad ka mgo busow, og-alomud su oghinallokon ki.
Ka bulak, ogsupsup ka dalig.
Kagi pad ni Hisus, “Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu. Sikan no otow no ogtumanon din ka ig-anad ku, kono ogkamatoy sikandin.”
ilud
Ka taloy-u, ogsabukan ta ka boi to taloy-u ko konò ki oglangub no og-insò.
sayop
gayad
Kuntoon, mgo sulod, ogparoromdomon ku sikaniu to sikan no Maroyow no Nangnangonon no in-anad ku kaniu nokani woy nigtuuan now no intagu now dio to goinawa now tongod ki Hisu Kristu. No kuntoon, ka sikan, nohimu on no dalig to pogtuu now.
Wà din nasalabò ka indogbak su nigligad ka bula di nakatamuk ka dangob.
No, marani ro dio to krus ni Hisus ogmanasasindog ka inoy rin, woy ka kakoy to inoy rin, woy si Maria no asawa ni Kliopas, woy si Maria Magdalina.
No ka pogtuu din dod ka igpabunsud to sikan no pagkoonan no oghingaranan to Paligad. No sikan ian to nigsugu si Moisis to oyow ogpamilikpilikan dan ka mgo gumawan dan to langosa to ayam oyow ka diwata no nigsugu to Magboboot no ogpanhimatoy to mgo panganoy no lukos dio to Ehipto, ko ogkakitaan din on ka langosa, ogligaran din doka baloy ran; kono din oghimatayan ka mgo panganoy no lukos to mgo pinanganak ni Israil.
gumutan
igì
Ka kayu no maroyow, maroyow ka bogas din woy kono ogbogas to maroot. Di ka kayu no duon dalu, maroot ka bogas din woy kono ogbogas to maroyow.
No, pogsayo dan to Magboboot pinbayo to kanta ran, nanlibuwas on no nanhondio to sikan no bubungan no oghingaranan to Olibu.
hi
Ko du-on otow no ogmahihinang ungod dan ogbasalon ka gimbal. Ka gimbal no ogbasalon ungod oglisagon.
No songo nigbogayan pad ka magintalunan to liwak din to ogsulung to mgo sakup to Magboboot. No ogpakaroog pad ka magintalunan kandan. Woy ogbogayan pad sikandin to katondanan din to og-alap to tibo no mgo kapunganan woy ka mgo ugpaan no ogkaloinloin no mgo kinagian kai to kalibutan.
bulan
no impohondini nu kai to tano oyow ogkitoon to tibo no koot-otawan oyow
kabus
Nò, og-inso a ko waro nanaan pulus ko nootow kinow no Hudiu, woy ko waro buwa pulus ka batasan ta to mgo Hudiu to ogpatuli?
Koddi no Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan, ogkamatoy a no ogpokounawa to kagi to tahan no impasulat to Magboboot. Di ogkoy-uan ka sikan no otow no ogpanabod koddi no Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan. Madmaroyow ian ko waro mootow ka sikan no otow.”
dakol
Nabaliung ka pogbantoy to buyag no ubal su ian nasì ogbantoy kandan ka anak dan no pilas.
Pogkarinog to mgo hibatoon ni Huan bahin to soini, nanhondio sikandan to pirisuan no nig-angoy ran ka lawa ni Huan woy insabal dan. Napongaan dan to pogsabal, nanhondio sikandan ki Hisus oyow ognangonan dan sikandin bahin ki Huan.
Nigsugu ni Hisus si Pedro woy ki Huan no kagi rin kandan to, “Hipanow kow on no panagana kow to poglabung ta to Pagkoonan to Paligad oyow ogkoonon tanow.”
Ko ogsilab ki no ma-agbot ka kalamag, ogdakol ka kutu to hapuy no oglayap no ogtugpa diò to songo bubunganon no songo ogkasilaban on
Ko og-anak ka otow, songo otow rod ka ig-anak din. Woy ko oghutuk ki ogkootow pinabayo to Gimukud to Magboboot ogkoimu kid on no anak to Magboboot.”
Duon marani to krus ka sagboka no boung no mangilu no bino. Nig-olod to songo otow ka molintok no kotson dio to sikan no bino no pigtuik din ka kotson to kayu no oghingaranan to hisop woy intaruwoy rin dio to bo-bo ni Hisus.
No to nakitaan dan on, nignangonnangon on to tibo no kagi to mgo diwata kandan bahin to soini no bato no si Hisus,
Natutung ka tulang
Ko duon utang ta dio to agad hontow, kono tad ogmalugayon to ogbayad. Di ka og-awoson ta to igparakdakoli to goinawa ta to duma ta, sikan ka ogkoiling to utang ta no kono ogkoubus no ogbayaran su ka otow no ogkohoy-u to duma rin, nakatuman on to Balaod to Magboboot.
Ka mundù ko igpamula ta, og-unug ka dalig to lawa.
Ko du-on magaliug noy, ko oghonatan to ko-onon, og-andalan ta to, “Usì, ogko-on kid on.” Oghinggaton tad to ogko-on kid.
Ogbarasan a ran no oghimatayan a ran di ka igkatatolu no allow ligkat to pogkamatoy ku, ogkootawan ad do.”
baloybaloy
No ko nighimatayan dan si Istiban no talagmalogot to kinagian nu, nighoo ad woy nigsasindog a to longod dan no nanggalat ku ka mgo kinabo dan.’
sagmak
No ko riad on to nigdatongan ni Hisus duon on ka duma no talag-anad to Balaod dan no taga Hirusalim no kagi ran bahin ki Hisus to, “Pigsoloran sikandin to igbuyag to mgo busow no si Biilsibul. Ian ka pigligkatan to kabogbogan din no ogpakarogil to mgo busow.”
Hagtongid to ogkagi su ogko-opos on ka goinawa ku koykow no ogpaka-atu ad koykow.
Sikan ian to nataga ki woy ogtuu kid to tu-tuu ian to indakoli kid to Magboboot. Tahan do to dakol ka goinawa rin to mgo otow. Sikan ian, ka mgo otow no ungod igdakoli ka duma ran, sikandan ka ogpakarumaruma to Magboboot woy songo ogdumaruma ka Magboboot kandan.
Woy impaangoy ni Husi ka amoy rin no si Hakub, mgo sulod din. Kapituan woy lalimma sikandan no mgo otow ka nanhondio to Ehipto.
Ka mundù no ugaton, woy on ogkito-on ko ogkasugba-on.
kingking
Ka ignangonnangon noy, kono to oyow ogkabantug ka kanami no ngaran. Di ian noy ro ian atag ignangonnangon to si Hisu Kristu ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy sikanami ka talagbulig kaniu su ligkat to pogsugu din kanami.
Duon sulat no imparokot dio to ampow to ulu ni Hisus no kagi to sulat, “Soini ka Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu.”
mamogkit
uyamu
bakal
Saysayo-on ka inoy’n Lisanta, konò oghimu to maro-ot.
Nò, Buyag Agripa,” kagi ni Pablo, “Sikan ian to nigpaagad–agad a to sikan no nigdinog ku no impapitow kanak no nigligkat to Langit,
buling
higbit
suksuk
bunog
Ogbunsud to oghimu to liang. Agad nokoy kalasia no liang, sikan ka og-agumon.
Nigdulduliak on ka asawa ni usi ko og-orok to homoy.
Ka lalimma, naawo on. Ka sagboka, og-alap dod to pandatuan din. No duon dod dangob no igbuyag no ogpokouma uromo no og-alap to pandatuan din, di magaan do ogkatampod.
Ko ogkapilak to mangayow, og-agbas ka kommag.
Og-arasan koy to pokoipanow koy.
Agad hontow no ogpakasalo, og-atu to sugu to Magboboot su sikan ian ka ighingaranan no salo.
lu-od
pila
No unawa to tu-tuu ian ka kagi ku tongod ki Hisu Kristu, songo tu-tuu ka soini no ignangon ku to kono ogkaatangan ka pognangonnangon ku dio to agad hondoi to probinsia to Girisia.
tosan
lingì
Niglogsad on woy si Birnabi dio to lunsud to Salamina woy nighondio to mgo baloy no anaranan to mgo Hudiu no innangonnangon dan ka kinagian to Magboboot. No si Huan no oghingaranan ki Markos, ogbuligbulig kandan to ognangonnangon.
buyagoy
Dokad di, nanangonan on sikandan to og–anaron nu kun ka tibo no mgo Hudiu no og-ugpo dio to sikan no mgo ugpaan to mgo kono no Hudiu oyow ogkoongkoran dan on ka mgo Balaod ni Moisis woy to oyow kono dan igpatuli ka mgo anak dan no lukos no igtuman to sikan no Balaod. Woy nahan dan no ognangonan nud sikandan oyow kono dan on ogtumanon ka mgo batasan ta to mgo Hudiu.
Ko ogsupmatan ta, oghondiò ki to baloy rin no diò ta ogtangkò kandin. Unawa ka supmat to ogtangka-an nu su ogkagian nu sikandin.
as-as
Nokoy ka igpatongod nu ka so-in no nanggo-on nu. kuntoon?
Nangokoon on ka tibo no mgo otow no nallantoy ka tibo.
ma-anma-an
Ka harina, ko igtopung ta ka saku to harina, ogkoimu on no abug su oglayap.
Pogdinog dan to sikan no daging, nandalapak woy nalimud on sikandan. Di natalap ka goinawa ran, su tag sagboka kandan, nakarinog to mgo otow no nakakagi to kandin no kinagian.
Ogpokog-ampow-ampow ka so-i diblu.
Nò, nigligkat on no noongkoran ka nalimud no mgo otow dio to pantad. Nanakoy ka mgo hibatoon din to balutu no nig-unturan ni Hisus no nigduma ran sikandin. Duon dod duma no mgo balutu no nigsundul kandan.
No insaluub tad on ka sikan no iam no pogkouyag ta no imbogoy to Magboboot kanta. No ka sikan no pogkouyag ta, ungod din og-iamon oyow ogkatagaan tad lagboy woy ogkaayun kid to og-unug to kandin no goinawa.
Ka nanhondiò no mgo Monobo to Manilà, ogmananoy ogman-ulì dini to Davao.
balukas
pangariban
Kono now kalingawi soini no ignangon ku kaniu. Mohon-ing ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no ogligkat dio to dapit to ogsilaan to allow, woy dio dapit to ogsalopan to allow no ogpokog-amut ko ogkoon dio to langit duma to kaap-apuan tanow no si Abraham woy si Isaak woy si Hakub.
Uroikon ki to subung to Liboganon.
Nò, nigluungan dan si Hisus woy nigsaluuban dan to moitom-itom no manggad oyow ogkoiling sikandin to Igbuyag.
pantad
turuk
Ko ogpoulion ku sikandan no kono ku pad ogpakoonon kandan, ogkabigtawan buwa dio to dalan su mariu ka pigpuunan to duma.”
Ko oghalin ki diò songo ugpa-an, mgo agpot ki rò. Agad duma ta no Manobò, mgo agpot ki rod su konò no ugpa-an ta.
talap
puntuk
boyow
Ka maragulus no kayu, ungod oglogdog no maga-an ogko-opus ko igtomog.
Nigparagas ka darua no otow to kagi ran to, “Songo duon dod duma noy no nighondio to nigsabalan ki Hisus no nigkita ran to malogot ian ka innangon to mgo boi, di waro dan kitaa si Hisus.”
Maniò to ipanungayow a?
“Nò, nigdakop dan on ka anak dut tagtuun woy indogpak dan sikandin dio to libuwasan to pinamula to ubas woy nighimatayan dan on.” Kagi ni Hisus to mgo otow, “Og-inso a kaniu ko ogmonuon buwa to tagtuun to sikan no mgo talagbantoy to pinamula rin?”
Woy songo kono ogparakoldakol woy kono oghubaboon ka duma rin. Kono din oghunnoon ka kandin no igkoiniat. Kono ogmagaan ogkabolu, woy kono og-indanan ka igkamasakit to goinawa rin.
Sikan no allow, duon mgo otow no ogpohimatayan dan ka sulod dan, woy songo duon mgo otow no ogpohimatayan dan ka mgo anak dan. Woy duon mgo otow no ogpohimatayan dan ka mgo amoy ran woy mgo inoy ran.
du-on
Pogkapawo, nan–ilis si Agripa daruwa ki Birnisi to madmaroyow no sabinit dan no nigsolod on to limuranan to mgo otow. Nanduma ka mgo igbuyag to mgo sundalu woy ka mgo mabantug no otow ligkat to lunsud to Sisaria. Pogkaponga, nigsugu ni Pistu to igpaangoy si Pablo.
Ogsalagap ki Tungonu to oglaras.
Di nakasabut si Hisus to maroot ka tuud dan to og-inso no nigtabak to, “Manio to oggawayan a now porom? Dini nu to koddi ka songo salapi no putow. Ogpitow a.”
gulabung
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to tibo no namminog kandin to, “Ko duon otow no ogpasakup koddi, og-awoson din to kono din ogkannugunan ka lawa rin no og-unug to koddi no goinawa. No allow-allow ogtiangon din ka kandin no krus.
Nighutuk nigligal si Pedro. No sikan do ian no nig-ukalo ka manuk.
Ko ogko-inug on ka tipu-an to pangi, litos no ogku-on ta woy ogkagatan woy og-amulan.
dua
“No ka tagtuun to pinamula, nighutuk pad man do sugua ka igkatatolu no suguonon din dio to tano din, di ka sikan no suguonon, nigpalian dan woy indogpak dan dio to libuwasan.
alinoknok
Nigkoon dan ka paan no intubad dio to Magboboot. Ka kagi to Balaod ta, ka litos do no ogkoon to sikan no paan ian do ka mgo talagpanubad to Magboboot.
Nò man, soini no Labow to mgo Talagpanubad, niggisi din ka kinabo din su nabolu su nigsumpalit kun ni Hisus ka Magboboot to ognangon to kandin ka anak din. “Wa ta og-awoson ka dangob no titigus, su nigdinog now ka sumpalit din dio to Magboboot.
Nò, nigsasindog on si Libi no nigduma on kandin. Pigbalagad din on ka mgo papil no niggalat din do duon ka tibo.
Di ko ogko-ongkoran ka sikan no ugpa-an, malinow on; warad otow, warad ogdinogon ta no ogkakagi.
sinoropan
Ian su, ko maroyow ka pogbulig dan to mgo otow no nigtuu, ogkatimulan ka pogtahud to mgo otow kandan, woy kono ogkasipod sikandan no ognangonnangon to sikan no pogtuu ta ki Hisu Kristu.
Pananglitan, nokani no bato a pad, ka kagi ku, ka pogdoromdom ku woy ka pogboot ku, tibo noiling to bato pad no kono pad no litos. Di kuntoon to buyag ad on, nig-ongkoran kud on ka batasan no binato.
Ian su ka otow no ogpangumusta kandin, ogbulig to sikan no maroot no hinimuan din.
lapdap
Ka Magboboot no ian Amoy to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu, nataga to kono no ubat ka soini no innangon ku. No sikandin ka ogkasayo taman to waro katamanan.
kilki
na-asna-as
tibuas
laba
Di ka igbuyag to sikan no anaranan to mgo og-ampu atag, nabolu su nigbawian ni Hisus ka boi to Allow ran to Oghimoloy. Kagi to igbuyag to anaranan dut mgo otow to, “Duon hon-om no allow no litos no ogpakatalabau ki, no hondini kow to sikan no mgo allow oyow ogkabawian kow. Di kono ogkaayun kuntoon no Allow ta to Oghimoloy.”
Nigbobootan si Pablo to Magboboot oyow ogpokohimu to mgo mabogbog no kabolongbolonganan no marulag ogkakitaan.
Ian su waro katondanan noy to ogsapad to mgo otow no og-unug to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon. Di duon katondanan noy to ogsapad to batasan no kono no litos to sikan no tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon.
Ko tapus to ogpangali, no ogluu-an on diò to woig ka mundù, ogpanibtiban tad ka dalig.
sarù
ligkat
Sikan no otow no ogkannugunan din ka kouyagan din kai to tano waro do nasi kandin no kouyagan to mohuri no allow. Di atag, sikan otow no ogbalagaron din ka kouyagan din kai to tano su ka pogtuu rin koddi woy ko bahin to Maroyow no Nangnangonon, duon nasi kandin no kouyagan ko mohuri no allow.
Ka amoy-amoy, konò no tu-tu-u no amoy.
Kagi to kamunoy to mundu-an, “Og-alaron ku bag so-in mundù ku.”
uling
Pogkita ni Hisus ki Natanial, nigkagi si Hisus bahin kandin to, “Pitow kow! Soini ka sagboka no taga Israil no kono ki ogpakasawoy to batasan din, mgo kagi rin.”
Ogpo-omoton din ka talabau. Og-awoson din no ogtalabau.
Igtunlun ki su ogkamatoy ki.
Ian su nohoy-uan now on ka sikan no mgo duma now no napirisu ligkat to pogtuu ran. Agad ko naagow ka mgo kalaglagan now, nig-aguanta now no narago kow nasi su nataga kow to duon karoyawon now no dio to langit no kono ogkaagow.
Ka siin no atop no ninipisi, maga-an ogkakomi ka ogkadi-okan ta to ig-atop.
gusì
tibitibi
Tagood to duon pad liwak ta, ungod ki oghimu to maroyow su mohon-ing ka mgo otow no oghimu to maroot.
ngangngang
“Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku koykow. Ko balubato ka pad, nigpanagana kad no nighipanow kad on no sikoykow ka nigboot ko hondoi ka ogdolog. Di Usi, ko ubanon kad on, ogparoropoon kad no ogbanggutan ka to songo otow no og-alapon ka dio to kono nu ogkoiniatan porom.”
Nò, ka immaroyow to Gimukud to Magboboot, songo immaroyow to kanami no goinawa to kono noy ogpohirapan sikaniu to pogtuman to kanami no mgo batasan. Di soini ro ka og–awoson no igpatuman now,
Di nig-iman-iman koy to sikandin porom ka ogpakapangabang poron kanta no mgo Hudiu no ian mgo pinanganak ni Israil. Di konon sikan do ka nohimuan su kuntoon ka igkatatolu no allow ligkat to nighimatayan dan si Hisus.
saga
lob-ong
pulan
bouk
Sikaniu no indakoli ku no mgo patalasulod to pogtuu ki Hisus, tahan kow on nataga to sikan. Sikan ian ayad-ayad kow oyow kono kow ogkoubatan to sikan no ig-anad to mgo maroot no otow. Ian su ko ogkaalap kow, ogpakaloko on ka poggongon now to pogtuu now to soini no tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon
aglagu
Sikan ian ka oghimuon ku oyow mohon-ing on ka ogtuu to sikan no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus woy to oyow songo ogkatalaran a to karoyawon no ogligkat to sikan ian no nangnangonon.
Ian su og-awoson to oyow waro liwak ni Satanas to ogdoog kanta su nataga kid to sikan ian ka mgo tuud din.
hallok
aporu
Nigpohimatayan now on si Hisus no ian talag–uyag to tibo. Di nig–uyag to Magboboot sikandin ligkat to kamatayon din. No sikanami ka ogpakamalogot to sikan.
Ka kabogbogan ku to pogdogil to mgo busow, ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot. Puun to soini, ogkatagaan now to noumaan kow on to pogtuman to Pogsugu to Magboboot to mgo otow kai to tano.”
Nò, maroyow ko ogsuguon nu ka mgo sundalu nu oyow ogpatamongan ka sabalanan din to tatolu no allow, oyow kono ogtakawon to mgo hibatoon din ka lawa rin no ignangon dan to mgo otow to nootawan sikandin ligkat to kamatayon din. Noubatan ka mohon-ing no mgo otow to sikandin ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan di ogkoubatan lagboy sikandan ko ogtuu to nootawan on sikandin kuntoon.”
Ian su soini ka goinawa to Amoy ku no Magboboot ian to sikan no otow no ogtokoron a rin to Anak a to Magboboot woy ogtuu ka sika otow koddi, ogkootawan ka sikan no otow no waro katamanan dio to kandin. Woy koddi, ogpootawan ku sikandin to sikan no mohuri no allow ta kai to soini no kalibutan. Ian ka goinawa to Amoy ku no Magboboot.”
Agad to waro nigpatuli ka sikan no mgo otow di ko ogpaagad-agad sikandan to sikan no Balaod to Magboboot, duon ogkakitaan ka iglogpad kaniu no mgo Hudiu. Ian su sikaniu ka nagalatan to Balaod no ingkasulat dongan woy sikaniu rod ka nigpatuli no igmaganangon to nigpasakup kow poron to Magboboot di kono kow atag ogpaagad–agad to sikan no Balaod.
“Soini ka pigsugu ku no pig-alam kud. Dakoli ka goinawa ku kandin woy narago a kandin. Ogparuma ku kandin ka Gimukud ku no kandin ka ogpohitaga ku dio to tibo no koot-otawan to pogboot ku kandan.
lugu
tu-as
putut
Songo konad on ogkohutuk no ogkabat-awan to agad nokoy no ilawan. Woy konad on ogdinogon kai ka mgo lagong to mgo iam pad og-asawa. Ka mgo ogpandagang kai to soini no dakol lunsud, mabantug poron lagboy sikandan dio to agad hondoi kai to kalibutan. Di ligkat to pogpamulingan dan no ogpokoubat, nagawayan ka tibo no mgo koot-otawan to soini no kalibutan.
Di kono no Hudiu ka mgo otow dio to sikan no lunsud woy kono ogtinawo to ogsagpit woy si Hisus dio to kandan su nataga sikandan to tuud ni Hisus ian to oghondio to Hirusalim to Dakol no Ampuanan.
bulaw
Agad to nig-aguanta ka Magboboot no waro din pad dongan logpari ka mgo otow no makasasalo, impapitow rin ka igkaroyow to batasan din su imbogoy rin to oyow ogkamatoy si Hisus no igliwan kanta su ligkat to langosa rin no noitis, ogpasayluon kinow on to mgo salo ta ko ogtuu kinow on kandin.
Nigkagi ka mgo Parisiu woy ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod ki Hisus to, “Maistru, ipapitow nu porom kanami ka songo koinuinuan no indanan noy to koykow ka pigsugu to Magboboot kai to tano.”
ulì
To nighipanow si Hisus no oghondio to lunsud to Hirusalim, dio nigbayo to dalan no olatan to mgo Probinsia to Samaria woy ka Galilia.
Ogka-alimotow ki no lagboy no ogmasakit so goinawa ta.
Duon pad man do dangob no pananglitan ni Hisus no innangon din to mgo hibatoon din. Kagi rin to, “Duon sagboka no datu no pigsaligan din ka talagbantoy rin to mgo kalaglagan din. Songo allow, duon nignangon to datu to nigdaraat to sikan no sinaligan din ka mgo kalaglagan din.”
Nò, nabolongbolong si Maria darua ki Husi to nigkita ran si Hisus. Kagi to inoy rin to, “Utu, manio naan to nighimu nu ka unawa to soini? Nasasow koy lagboy no namangho koykow.”
bulut
Di kagi ni Hisus, “Ka ignangon ku koykow Pedro, woy og-ukalo ka manuk ko magaan on ogkapawo, ka tatolu kad on ognangon to wa kad nigtokod koddi.”
boklas
ngangang
No sikaniu no ogtuu ki Hisus no dio to lunsud to Ruma, songo nalagkos kow to duma no mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisus su nohimu kow on no sakup din.
Duon pananglitan ni Hisus. Kagi rin, “Ka soin no kalamag, agad hondoi, ogkalkalamag do duon. Ogdinogon ta ka ogdaragonu di wa ki mataga ko hondoi buwa ogligkat woy ko hondoi buwa ogdoog. Unawa ian ka otow no nootow nighutuk no pinabayo to Gimukud to Magboboot. Kono ki ogpakakita ko moomonu ka pogkootow rin.”
Dakola now ka goinawa now kandan woy tahura now su ogbuligan kow ran woy og-awoson to maawang ka goinawa now to duma now.
to oglibug, to ogkasina to kalaglagan, woy to oghimu to agad nokoy no kalasi no maroot. Dio dod to maroot no goinawa ta ogpuun to maroot no ogpokoiling to og-uubat to kono ki ogkasipod to oghimu to maroot, to ogkoima, to ogwangalon ka duma rin, to ogparakoldakol ka kandin no goinawa, woy kono ogsumsumanan to maroyow.
Ka otow, ko du-on ignangon din to duma rin ogna-asna-as dò ka ogkagi to talinga to duma rin ko nokoy [ka] igholos dan no darua rò kandan ka nataga to sabut dan.
tubù
Nig-inso dan ki Hisus, “Ogmonuon noy naan oyow ogtumanon noy ka mgo igsugu to Magboboot?”
lisuann
Nò, sikanak, nabogayan a to katondanan ku to pog-alap-alap ku to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon. No ian su nohoy-uan a to Magboboot su nigbuligan a rin to dakol no kabogbogan din.
Ogkaloganan ki to oghipanow. Ogkapogul ki to oghipanow. Kò ki ogpakato-od ko ogkapogul ki.
Ka sikan, ogkounawa to ingkasulat dongan to kinagian to Magboboot. Kagi rin to: “Waro otow no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot. Waro agad sagboka.
No ka Dakol no Ampuanan, nigsokol to obol no nigligkat to layag woy to kabogbogan to Magboboot. No waro agad hontow no makalopow dio to sikan no ampuanan taman to ogkapongaan on to pogdagsang to ka sikan no papitu no igkabaybayari no nan-alap to sikan no papitu no mgo diwata to Magboboot.
To nigdinog on ka kapitan to duon si Hisus, nigsugu din ka mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu to oyow oghondio ki Hisus no igtugun dan si Hisus to ogpohondini on to kandin su oyow ogkabawian din on ka suguonon din.
ambow
ago-u
Ma-an-andungoloy ki ka ogko-on. Sagboka rò to ogdatongan.
Sikan ian to kono koy ogmalotoy to og-uwang to soini no ignangonnangon noy. Agad ogkabuyag ka lawa noy, di dio to goinawa noy, allow allow, ungod ogkohogot ka pogsalig noy dio to Magboboot.
lawod
Di atag nignangon ka diwata to Magboboot to mgo boi to, “Kono kow ogkahallok. Nataga a no ogpamitawon now si Hisus no inlansang dan dio to krus.
Woy ogtabak a kandan to, ‘Malogot ka ignangon ku kaniu no ko waro kow nangabang to sika mgo otow no doisok do ka katondanan dan no nigtuu koddi, koddi ian ka wa now pangabangi.’
Pogkataga ni Pablo, nig–umow rin ka sagboka to mgo kapitan no kagi ni Pablo to, “Ihatod nu ka soini no balubato dio to igbuyag to mgo sundalu su duon ignangon din.”
Igsu-ut ka sapatus nu.
Agad konon duma ta ko ogdalong ki to ogsinogow, ig-amulung ta to ogkagi to tahan na-an ian to ogkamatoy ki.
losung
No to dio a pad to kaniu no duon og-awoson ku, waro ku buyui sikaniu, agad hontow. Ian su duon mgo taga Masidonia no mgo nigtuu no nokouma, no nig-alap dan ka tibo no og-awoson ku. Taman kuntoon, waro ku pohirapi sikaniu to pog-ugpo ku. No ligkat kuntoon, songo kono kud ian ogbuyuon sikaniu.
Nokoy labot ku to mgo otow no waro pad nigtuu? Kono a ogpaginlabot kandan. Ka Magboboot ka ogboboot kandan. Di ka mgo otow no nigtuu no ogkalimud dio to kaniu to og–ampu, sikan poron ka ogbobootan now. Nò, “Dogila now on ka sikan no maroot no otow oyow konad on ogpakaamut kaniu ko og-ampu kow.”
No, kagi rin ki Tomas, “Usi, dii nu ka tinuru nu. Pitow ka, kai nu to bolad ku. Woy pitow ka, isamsam nu ka bolad nu kai to kiliran ku. Hagtong kad, Usi, to ogtambabo; tuu kad on.”
“Nò,” kagi ni Pedro kandin, “Kono ku ogpahugasan koykow ka koddi no paa.” Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Ko kono nu ogpohugasan koddi ka paa nu, kono kud on no hibatoon sikoykow.”
Sikanak ka an-anayan woy ka mohurian. Woy sikanak dod ka kabinunsuran woy ka katamanan to tibo.”
Di to waro pad mapirisu si Huan nigbautismuan din pad ka mgo otow dio to woig to Hordan woy songo nigbautismuan din si Hisus. Naponga soini, niglonghag si Hisus nig-ampu no napuasan on ka langit,
tulus
Ko duon otow no ogkagi to sikan no loin no kinagian, og-awoson to daruwa woy ko tatolu ro ka ogkagi no ogmasoipsoipoy. No songo og-awoson to duon pad ka oglituk to sikan no kagi ran.
bulun
Nò, ko nokouma si Maria dio ki Hisus, nigluhud dio to tangkaan din no ogpohoy-uhoy-u no kagi rin, “Buyag,” kagi, “ko duon kad kai porom, waro mamatoy ka maama ku kuntoon.”
Ko du-on insò ta, konò kid oglopow to solod to baloy ko warò iglukos dan oyow konò ki ogkabayungon.
kalumangan
No sikantanow no nigtuu kandin, ogkounawa ki ro to lawa ni Hisus. No ogkatibulus ka tibo no tuud din kai to kanta. No sikandin ka ogtibulus to agad hondoi no dio to Langit woy ka kai to tano.
bulang
Ko duon otow no og-inso kaniu, nangoni now ro to, ‘Og-awoson to Igbuyag noy ka soini no ayam di magaan din do ig-uli.’
Woy igpohondio ku ka daruwa no otow no talagmalogot to kinagian ku. No igpanangon ku ka kinagian ku taman to 1,260 no allow. Ogkikinabo sikandan to saku no nighimu no kinabo.
no waro ogpakasokod to sikan no igkohoy-u rin. Ligkat to dakol no katagaanan din woy ka dakol no katouanan din,
li-od
Nakakita on ka koddi no mata to Talagpangabang to mgo koot-otawan
U-ulus ki to tig-an.
Karoyow ka lagong to sikan no boi; maroyow ka li-og din.
Nignangon sikandan to, “Maroyow ko kono tanow igdongan to Pagkoonan to Paligad to Magboboot su ogkasamuk ka mgo otow.”
kiling
Nò, nabawian on ka talinga rin; ogpakarinog on woy nabawian on ka dilo din; ogkalituk on ko ogkagi.
No, nakakita si Hisus to nati to asno no nig-unturan din on. Un-unawa ka soin no pighimu rin to sikan no nasulat to Tahan no Kasulatan.
Sikandan, nigsakoy on to barku no nighun–a on dio to lunsud to Troas. No ko diad on, nigtagad kanak no si Lukas woy ki Pablo.
Omunaan ko duon ogkabayaan now no igkabaybayari, og-awoson to og-aguantoon now ro. Ian su ligkat to sikan, og-anaron kow to Magboboot, no ian ka ig-indan to anak kow rin su hondoi buwa no bato no kono og-anaron to amoy rin?
No to pogbautismu kanta, songo nalagkos kid kandin no ingkasabal on ka lawa rin no namatoy. No ian su oyow songo ogpakalagkos kinow on ki Kristu to pogkouyag din to waro katamanan su ligkat to kabogbogan to Amoy rin no ka Magboboot. Ian su oyow ogmaroyow on ka mgo batasan ta no ogkaayun on to sikan no iam no pogkouyag ta.
lugnus
Woy ogbalagaron din ko duon igmasakit to goinawa rin. Ogsaligan din ka duma rin, woy layun og-iman-iman to maroyow no oghimuon to duma rin, woy ogpakapoponod to tibo no mgo igkabaybayari din.
kombul
Ko nigsawod din, duon mgo boni no nakasawod dio to dalan no pigpan-ulib to mgo manukmanuk ka sikan no boni.
“Ogkaboros ka sagboka no dalaga no waro pad magongoni to lukos. Og-anak sikandin to bato no lukos no soini no bato oghingaranan ki Imanwil no ka kalitukan to ngaran din ‘Nig-amut kanta ka Magboboot.’”
Ligkat to sikan no hapuy woy ka mgo obol woy ka asupri no oglibuwas to bo-bo to mgo kuddo, ogkakamatoy on ka igkatatolu no baad to tibo no mgo otow no ogman-ugpo kai to tano.
Ka kayu no ogpoloron, oggogotud ka ogkapolod on.
Sikan su dakol ka goinawa to Magboboot no Amoy to Anak din no ogpapitawon din kandin ka tibo no oghimuon din. Agad ogpapitow rin pad ka madmaroyow woy ogkoin-inuan kow.
No kuntoon, duon on ka igtagad to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta kanak no igsayo din to mgo otow no nohimu on no maroyow. No igbogoy rin kanak uromo to sikan no Allow no ogbootan din ka mgo hinimuan to tibo no mgo otow. Sikandin ka talagboot no oglitos on ian ka pogboot din. Di kono no sikanak do ka ogbogayan din di songo ogkabogayan ka tibo no mgo otow no ogkarago no ogtagad to poglibong ni Hisu Kristu kai to tano.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Dini to kanta ka darua ro bag no sintabus ka litos to igboli to lalimma no manukmanuk no ogkounawa bag to ul-ul, di agad to baratu ro ka sikan no mgo manukmanuk, kono ogkalingawan to Magboboot to agad sagboka kandan.
Toomon noy ka ariplanu ko asoom bua.
Ogsayoon ta ka Magboboot no ian doka tu-tuu ian no Magboboot woy ka Talagpangabang kanta su ligkat to nighimu ni Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. Sikandin dod ka ogkatou no ogbulig kanta oyow kono ki ogkaayat to ogpakasalo. No uromo, sikandin dod ka ogpasasindog kanta dio to tangkaan din to waro igkoogot din kanta. No sikan ian to dakol ka igkarago ta. Nò, ligkat to waro pad nohimu ka soini no kalibutan, woy kuntoon taman to waro katamanan, ka Magboboot ka litos no ogkasayo to tibo su waro ogpakasokod kandin, woy sikandin ka lagboy no mabogbog no ogpakaampow to tibo, woy sikandin dod ka igbuyag to tibo. Hoo ian.
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Di sikaniu no mgo hibatoon ku, dakol ka igkarago now su ogkatou kow ogpitow woy ogkatou kow ogpamminog.
No ka sikan no pinpinnuanan din, songo nalingotan to kawaan woy hop-at no pinnuuanan. No duon naminpinnuu no songo kawaan woy hop-at no mgo pogbuyagon. Mamaputi ka mgo sabinit dan woy duon bulawan no tangkulu ran.
dusilom
bugtung
Ko ogkalituk on ka og-abalangon din, ogbuyu-on din on.
Di nigkagi ka mgo Parisiu to, “Ka igbuyag to mgo busow ka nigbogoy kandin to kabogbogan oyow ogpakarogil to mgo busow no nigsolod to mgo otow.”
Malogot ka soin no kagi ku kaniu. “Agad hontow, ko ogsuguon din ka soin no bubungan to, ‘Awo kad kai; dio ka to dagat’ no ko kono ogtambabo ka sikan no nigsugu di ogsalig do to ogkaawo, ogkahalin ka sikan no bubungan dio to dagat.
Di kinagian to Magboboot ki Abraham to, ‘Oglogparan ku ka mgo otow no og–uripon to mgo pinanganak nu. Pogkaponga, og–awo ka mgo pinanganak nu woy ogpakalibong on to soini no tano to Kanaan. No ogsimboon a ran kai.’
Ko ogkatangkoban ka dilò, ogkatampod.
Di to nigkita kud ka oghimuon dan to kono ogkaayun to pogtuu ta to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon, nigkagian ku si Pedro dio to tangkaan to mgo otow. Kagi ku to, “Agad to Hudiu ka di duon dod nabalagad nu no batasan to mgo Hudiu no nounawa ka rod to kono ka no Hudiu. Nò, ko sikan ian ka koykow no batasan, manio to ogpogoson nu ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu to oyow ogpakatuman sikandan to mgo batasan to mgo Hudiu?” Sikan ka innangon ku ki Pedro.
hoy-u
tolon
Ian to og-awoson to og-alamon no pogbuyagon ka otow no waro maroot no batasan din su ogkasaligan sikandin to Magboboot to og-alap to mgo otow no ogtuu on kandin. No og-awoson to kono ogparakoldakol woy kono ogmagaan ogkabolu woy kono oglasinglasing woy kono no ogmabulut woy og-awoson to kono oggolgol to layun do no salapi.
Pogkarinog ni Hisus to innangon to otow nabolongbolong sikandin. Nigkagian ni Hisus ka mgo otow to, “Malogot ka soini no ignangon ku kaniu to waro ku pad kitaa ka agad hondoi no otow agad to mgo pinanganak ni Israil no ogpakasokod to pogtuu to soini no kapitan.
Nigparani ni Hisus kandin ka nalibulung no mgo otow, mgo hibatoon din. Ko marani on, kagi rin kandan, “Ko duon otow no ogkoiniatan din ka ogpasakup koddi, og-awos to kono din ogkannugunan ka mgo koiniatan din woy ka lawa rin woy og-unug koddi. Agad ogbalagaron to sikan no otow ka igkabaybayari rin agad ko ogkamatoy bahin to sakup ku sikandin no ian ka ogkounawa to ogtiangon din ka kandin no krus no og-alapon din to kamatayon din. Ko oghimuon din soini, ogkohimu on no hibatoon ku sikandin.
Pogpitow ni Moisis to sikan, nabolongbolong. Di kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag to,
Ko mahapun on, oghiloson to bagal ka sikan no doun to baluy woy ko lumlon oyow ogka-alikid.
Ko du-on duma ta no du-on batasan no kono ogkabalowbalow, ogbungku-an tad ka og-anad kandin to maroyow.
Di ko nouyag ad on oghun-a a kaniu dio to Galilia.
Bogayi a nu to sabun
tu-ud
balungkag
Buyagbuyag bua ka miow dut kuddo?
Kagi to songo otow, “Uripon ka na-an nikandin.” Ogtabak a to, “Ho-o ian su pangabaga a rin.”
Du-on otow no nagisì ka sabinit din no nigtupakan to nigtoì no manggad.
To nakarinog ka sampulu no hibatoon ni Hisus nabolu sikandan to sikan darua no patalahari.
Ka mo-irob no warad sobu, manguod on no konad ogkagamit su konò og-utong su warad galang
No lagkos to sikan, to nighimu to Magboboot si Hisus no talagpanubad, duon pogpangulibot to Magboboot no igmalogot din to kagi rin. No kagi rin ki Hisus to, “Sikanak no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag, ogpangulibot a no igmalogot ku to kono ku ogkahalin ka soini no ignangon ku to nohimu kad on no talagpanubad taman to waro katamanan.” Ian ka kagi rin. Dokad di, ka tahan no mgo talagpanubad no nigbogayan on to katondanan, waro atag pogpangulibot no igmalogot to katondanan dan.
No, nig-agpas dan on gaata ka sigay ran, no nigduma on ki Hisus.
manggad
kadkad
Ka bulawan now woy ka mgo salapi now, ogmoitom on. No ko mohuri no allow, ka sikan no moitom, ian ka igpatokod to logoron kow woy ogkounawa rod to hapuy no ogpokoubus to mgo lawa now su ka naay-ayaman now, ian igkalagkos on to igkabolu to Magboboot kaniu.
logtas
labow
Nò, dio to lunsud to Hupi duon boi no tahan no nigtuu ki Hisus. Ka ngaran din to Hinibriu si Tabita. Di ko Ginirigu, si Dorkas. No ko kanta pa, ka lituk to ngaran din, Usa. Maroyow no boi si Dorkas, su dakol ka igkohoy–u rin to mgo otow woy magaan ogbogoy ko duon og–awoson.
Sikan ian, su si Hisus ka nohimu on no dalan ta, ungod tad ogsayoon ka Magboboot. No ka sikan, ogkohimu on to igpanubad ta kandin. Woy to kanta no kagi, ogdakolon ta ka ngaran din.
To nigkokoon si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din dio to baloy ni Matiu, nig-amut ka mohon-ing no mgo talagkubla to buhis tagkos to mgo otow no tahan no sinawoy sikandan no songo nigkoon dio.
tungug
Ko og-o-orok ki to agoloy, ogkuò ki to loban no tagu-an to bonì no ogsinikoton ta ka loban kai to hawak.
No ogkagi ran to, “Kalogon lagboy to mgo otow to sikan no dakol no lunsud no nokani nakakikinabo to mgo maddoyow woy mahal no manggad no malalab woy malugowlugow, woy duon pad immaroyow rin no bulawan, woy to mgo mahal no batu woy to pirlas no oghimuon no baliog.
Soini ka pananglitan ku. Ko oghayoran ka boi, masakit lagboy su allow rin on to og-anak. Di ko niglosut on ka bato, ogkalingawan din on ka igkoirapi rin su narago on man to duon on anak din.
gamut
dalu
Di kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Soini no sugu ka insugu ni Moisis su makogal so mgo ulu to mgo otow; kono kow ogkaanad.
‘Kagi to Magboboot to, Uromo to tipouri no otow, dio to agad hondoi kai to ampow to tano, ogpambogayan ku to Gimukud ku. No ka mgo anak now, agad lukos woy boi, ogpakanangonnangon to kinagian ku. No ka mgo lukos no kono pad amana no buyag, duon igpapitow kandan no mgo ogpaatawan. No ka mgo lukos no buyagbuyag on, duon igpapitow kandan no mgo tagoinop.
No ka mgo otow no mohon-ing no nanlimudlimud to oyow ogbantoy ki Hisus, to songo nigkita to tibo no nohimu dio to kandin, nan-uli on, no to pog-uli dan, nanagpi dan ka sosolobon dan to masakit lagboy so goinawa ran.
Nò, pigtuyuk dan on ka nati dio ki Hisus no nigluung dan ka malayat no kinabo dan no impanhanig to poka to nati woy nigbuligan dan on si Hisus to ogsakoy.
sil-ap
Ko moon-ing ka mgo batò no ogmanlili-ag, ogmanguliguli ka konò ogkatolon no oghipanow. Ogpokogsubalsubal.
digkit
pudpud
tustus
Natagaan ku ka mgo batasan now su ka goinawa now kanak, kono no moinit woy songo kono amana no mahagsil. Maroyow ku poron ko ogmoinit on ian ka goinawa now kanak. Ko kono, maroyow ko ogmahagsil kow on ian.
Woy tagood to ognangonnangon sikandan to kinagian to Magboboot, ogbogayan sikandan to kabogbogan oyow ogkohimu no ogpakaatang sikandan to mgo kibol oyow kono ogpokouran. Woy ogbogayan sikandan to kabogbogan to ogbaluy on no langosa ka woig. Woy songo ogbogayan to kabogbogan to oyow, agad kon-u ran ogkoiniati to ogboboot, ogkoumaan on ka tano to agad nokoy no igkabaybayari to mgo otow.
ogkatagaan dan to soini ian ka Talapangabang kandan. Kandin, ian ogkounawaan ka ilawan no ogpakabat-ow to mgo otow no konon Hudiu oyow ogkitoon dan ka dalan no ogpokohondio koykow,” kagi ni Simion to Magboboot. “No puun to soini no bato, ogkasayo ka mgo otow nu no mgo pinanganak ni Israil” kagi ni Simion.
Ka molungangon, konò no ubaton, konò ogwangal, ogkaallok no oghimu to maro-ot, ogpo-obos.
Ogpabubgubatoy ka darua no ugpa-an.
Ko maroyow ka pogdumaruma ran, ogkatibug ka parumrumooy ran.
No, nighipanow on woy si Hisus no nanhondio to sikan no ugpaan no marani to lunsud to Sisaria Pilipu. To diad on sikandan, nig-insaan din ka mgo hibatoon din no kagi rin to, “Koddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan kai to tano, hontow a kun to sumsumanan to mgo otow?”
Duon lukos dio to Gadara no pigbusawan. Nalugoy on sikandin woy kono ogkikinabo; oglobas do ian. Kono og-ugpo dio to baloy su dio og-ugpo to mgo pilang no lobonganan. Malasi ogbangguti to karina mgo igpakagat no putow woy pigbantayan sikandin to mgo duma rin. Di ogbigtawon din do ka mgo imbanggut kandin, woy ogginanuyon to busow ka sika otow dio to holholawan. Nò, to niglogsad si Hisus, nigtagbu sikandin to sikan no otow no pigbusawan. Pogkita rin ki Hisus, nigngangang woy niglangkob sikandin dio to tangkaan ni Hisus. Nigsugu on ni Hisus ka busow su ogdogilon din. No sikan ian to nigbabansagon ka otow no pigbusawan no kagi rin to, “Hisus, Anak to Magboboot, nokoy ka tuud nu koddi? Pangayungpu a koykow to kono a nu bag logpari.”
Nignangonan kud sikaniu to sikan no ingkanangon kanak to lagboy no og-awoson ka pogkamatoy ni Hisu Kristu oyow ogkaawo din on ka mgo salo ta. No ka sikan, nounawa to impasulat to Magboboot dongan.
Nigtabak ka mgo Hudiu no kagi ran, “Ka mgo nighimu nu kono ian ogbatuon ka. Ka tuud noy, ian su nigsumpalit nud ka Magboboot. Otow ka ro porom. Manio to ogpogsokod ka to Magboboot?”
Tatolu no bulan ka igpougpo din dio to Girisia, no nakaroromdom sikandin to og–untud to barku no oghondio to probinsia to Siria. Dokad di, su nanangonan on sikandin to duon bantaan to mgo Hudiu to oghimatayan sikandin, nigtuud si Pablo to oglibong no dio ogbayo to probinsia to Masidonia.
ilob
Nan-uli ka tibo no mgo otow, di si Hisus, nighondio to sikan no bubungan no oghingaranan to Olibu.
Nò, nigkagi man do sikandin to, “Isulat nu ka soini no igpaalap nu dio to sikan no suguanon ku no ogtanudtanud to mgo otow no nigtuu no dio to lunsud to Sardis. Soini ka igsulat nu, ‘Ka soini no kagi, ogligkat kanak no duon Gimukud ku no duon papitu no igpohitaga to kabogbogan din. Woy duon to kanak ka papitu no bituon. Nataga a to mgo batasan now. Agad to duon mgo otow no nahan dan to mohogot ka pogtuu now kanak, di nataga a to waro atag mohogot ka pogtuu now. Ian su noiling kow to mgo nammatoy su ogkoiling to waro pogtuu now kanak.
Nagulibid so bibig nu?
Nò, sikaniu no mgo tagtuun to uripon, songo imaroyow now ro ka batasan now to mgo uripon now. Kono now hinalati sikandan su nataga kow to tibo kinow, agad uripon ki woy ko kono, duon igbuyag tanow no dio to Langit no waro oghilabion din no otow.
Wa now buwa malingawi, mgo sulod, ka dakol no talabau, noy no dio koy to kaniu no nignangonnangon koy to kaniu to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangon no nigligkat to Magboboot su nigtalabau koy to maallow woy ko marusilom su oyow kono kow ogkabaybayaran to pog-ugpo noy dio to kaniu.
Di ka lituk to kagi ni Hisus atag, ian ka lawa rin no ogkamatoy di ogkootawan to igkatatolu no allow.
Ka bagal to agoloy, ian pakow rin ka taliwarò.
batuk
Di kara sagboka no otow, nigbalibad dan do. Ka sagboka, nigkagi to, ‘Nakaboli a to tano. Og-awoson ku to oghondia a su ogpitawon ku pad. Nangoni nu ro ka tagtuun to pagkoonan to kono a ogpakaamut to pagkoonan din.’
Ka otow, ogpani-ang to kayu no igtomog din.
buling
Ogpa-ag-agapoy ka mgo kuddò.
Pogpitow ku, no duon tatolu no busow no ogkoiling to mgo bakbak. Ka sagboka, dio oglibuwas to bo-bo to sikan no ulod no ogkohingaranan to daragun. Ka dangob, dio niglibuwas to bo-bo to sikan no magintalunan no nigligkat to dagat. No ka igkatolu, oglibuwas to bo-bo to sikan no magintalunan no nigligkat to tano no ian ka ubaton no talagnangon.
nangon
Kagi ni Pilatu, “Kaniu ro ka ogboboot no sikan no Balaod to mgo Hudiu ka ogtumanon now.” Nigtabak ka mgo Hudiu to, “Kono ogbogoy ka koykow no balaod to oghimatayan noy ka otow.”
Ogkoiniatan ku lagboy woy og-iman-iman a to kono ku ogtalison ka igpatuman to Magboboot kanak to oyow waro igkasipod ku woy to oyow agad kon-u, kono ad ogkahallok to ognangonnangon to kagi rin oyow ligkat to agad nokoy ka ogkabayaan ku, agad ko ogkamatoy a woy ko ogkabui a rod, ogkasayo si Kristu.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Nakakita kad kandin. Koddi ian ka ogkagi koykow kuntoon.”
Nò mgo sulod ku to pogtuu no songo nig-abin to Magboboot oyow ogpokougpo kinow dio to kandin uromo dio to langit, ogdoromdomon ta si Hisus no pigsugu to Magboboot kai to kanta woy nohimu on no Labow to mgo Talagpanubad to soini no pogtuu no og-abinon ta.
Sikanami ka ogpakamalogot to soini no mgo inangonnangon noy. Woy ka Gimukud to Magboboot, songo ogpakamalogot to sikan, no sikandin ka igbogoy to Magboboot to agad hontow no ogpaagad–agad kandin.”
Nigtabak si Pedro to, “Agad og-ongkoran ka to tibo no duma ku, sikoddi atag, kono a og-ongkod koykow.”
Nò, poglonghag pad to mgo suguanon din dio to langit su ogpitow ki Hisus no nabatun, natokow sikandan to duon on daruwa no otow no nakapanabinit to manggad no mapoti no duon nigsasindog to longod dan.
kogal
Sikan ian no nig-agpas on nangipanow ka sikan no mgo talagbantoy to ayam no waro malugoy no nokouma sikandan no nigkita ran on si Maria woy si Husi woy songo nigkita ran ka bato no si Hisus no nigpohibat dio to koonanan to ayam.
No soini dod si Hisus no imparakop no imbogoy on kaniu. Di tahan no nataga ka Magboboot to ogmonuon now si Hisus. Woy tuud to Magboboot to ogkatuman on ka sikan. No impohimatayan now on si Hisus to mgo otow no waro mogsimba to Magboboot woy inlansang dan on sikandin dio to krus.
Nataga kow man poron to, ka mgo talagbulig woy ka sikan no mgo talagpanubad dio to dakol no baloy no ampuanan to Magboboot, ogbogayan sikandan to ogkakoon dan ligkat to sikan no inhandug to mgo otow woy to sikan no mgo ayam no impanubad dan dio to sikan ian no baloy.
Hutuk man do insaa to mgo Parisiu ka sikan no nabawian. Nig-inso dan, “Sikoykow, nokoy ka koykow no goinawa kandin su ka koykow no mata ka nigbawian din?” Nigtabak no kagi rin, “Talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot sikandin.”
Ka harina, ko igtopung ta ka saku to harina, ogkoimu on no abug su oglayap.
sondit
Agad to duon mgo otow no nahan no ogmananoy ogtuman ka Magboboot to innangon din, di kono man no mananoy. Ian su og-aguantoon din no ogtagad to mgo otow su oyow ogliwak sikandan no og-iniug to maroot no mgo batasan dan. Ian su kono ogkoiniat sikandin no duon agad sagboka no otow no kono ogkapangabangan to logpad din.
Di kagi ni Pedro kandin to, “Manio Ananias, to nigpaboot ka ki Satanas no nig–ubatan nu ka Gimukud to Magboboot to niggalat nu man ka baad to salapi no imbayad to tano nu?
lislis
Ko maga-inaldow ka woig, konò amana no mo-init.
Pang-agbas-agbas ki to ugpa-an to mgo otow.
Nig-inso sikandan ki Hisus no nigkagi to, “Manio no niglop-ang ka mgo hibatoon nu to mgo in-anad no ingalat kanta to mgo kaap-apuan ta, su waro dan hugasi ka mgo bolad dan bahin to batasan ta woy ogkoon.”
kumapoy
tubung
Woy nigtabak ka ogpangasawa to, ‘Wara a mogtokod kaniu.’ ”
Ko ogpakagongon to ulod no oghilu woy ko ogpokoinum to oghilu kono oghiluon sikandan. Ka dangob pad. Ogsamsamanon dan ka mgo otow no nigdaralu no ogkabawian on ka sikan no mgo otow.”
Sikan ian no malogot ka innangon ku kaniu no mgo Hudiu,” kagi ni Hisus, “Kono kow on ogsakupon to Magboboot duon to Pogsugu din. Ka mgo kootawan no oghimu to ogkoiniatan din no sikandan ka ogsakupon din to Pogsugu din.
Nò sulod, kono ka og-unug to sikan no mgo maroot no mgo oghimuon din. Di ian nu ro unuga ka mgo maroyow no hinimuan. Ka mgo otow no oghimu to maroyow, sikandan ka nakagongon to Magboboot. Di ka otow no maroot ka oghimuon din, waro nigtokod to Magboboot.
Agad ko maroyow ka pogsayo nu to Magboboot, di kono ogkohogot ka pogtuu to sikan no duma ta su kono ogpakasabut.
Tampod to kampit ka tingkikan.
Tago-oran noy ka baoy ni Minol su wà pad maponga ka kanami no baoy.
Sikan ian, nighagtong nigkoon si Hisus no nigsasindog. Nig-awo din ka kinabo din woy pigholon din no igtarapu.
Si Joaquin pad ka naka-alap to katondanan to kapitan to Baranggay Gupitan.
Di ko duon otow no nahan din no maroyow ka tibo no oghimuon din no waro atag igkatalap din, dokad di kono no tu-tuu, ogkoubatan do sikandin to goinawa rin.
kalawag
Ingawoy nu rò kanami oyow ogpoko-orok ka.
Konad on ogkamatoy sikandan no ogkounawa sikandan to mgo diwata no suguanon to Magboboot. Ogkoimu on no mgo anak to Magboboot sikandan su ogkootawan on sikandan ligkat to pogkamatoy ran,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ka sunud no allow, nigboboot si Hisus to oghondio to Galilia. Nigtagbu rin si Pilipi no nigkagi to, “Usi, duma ka koddi.”
busiak
Ka makopal no gapun no mo-itom, kibol.
unoy
Mohon-ing lagboy ka mgo otow no nanhondio ki Huan su ogkoiniatan dan ko ogbautismuan din on sikandan dio to woig. Kagi ni Huan kandan, “Sikaniu, ian now ogkounawaan ka mgo ulod no oghilu su maroot ka mgo batasan now. Hontow ka nigbohog kaniu to oyow ogpakasalsalia kow on to igkabolu to Magboboot kaniu to sika mgo salo now?
Ko niglibong ka mgo sundalu no talagbantoy dio to mgo igbuyag to talagpanubad woy ka mgo Parisiu nig-insaan ka mgo talagbantoy, “Manio to waro kow makarakop?”
posikposik
bakal
Di nigkagi si Hisus kuwo kandan, “Ka sikan no kagi no nigligkat to langit, sikaniu ka tuud din; kono no si koddi.
salapang
Di du-on og-abalang no konò ogpoko-uwang ko ognangon
Nig-anlas on to woig ka agoloy no warò pad nabahin.
Di ka bato no in-anak to inoy no uripon, nigligkat to pogboot do to otow. Di ka bato no in-anak to sikan no inoy no kono no uripon, nigligkat to pogboot to Magboboot no nigtuman din on ka insabut din ki Abraham.
Ogsuguon ku ka mgo diwata to Magboboot dio to ogkatamanan to suuk to soin no kalibutan taman to ogkatamanan to langit oyow oglimuron dan ka mgo otow no nig-alam to Magboboot dio to Pandatuan din.”
Ogtoom a kaniu. “Nokoy so igtalosob now kanak?”
Agad ogmonuon ku to ognokalnokal, ogmalotoy ka goinawa ku ian.
suutan
Nò, nig-ongkod si Satanas ki Hisus dio no nokouma on ka mgo diwata no suguanon to Magboboot no nigsagman dan si Hisus to awosonon din.
pial
Mgo sulod, oghutuk a ogbuyu kaniu to oyow igdakoli koy to goinawa now su waro man salo noy to agad hontow. Waro noy pasuwaya ka pogtuu to agad hontow. Woy waro koy nigpaginpulus to agad hontow.
tigbal dò
katkat
lantod
habot
sinul-ad
Nigdinog si Apù Amasig to nasasow a to gabas.
gukot
lagong
Di ka insugu to Magboboot kanta, ko igdakoli ta sikandin, og-awoson to songo igdakoli ta ka duma ta.
Di,” kagi ni Pablo, “kono ku ogkannugunan ka lawa ku. Balagad ko ogkamatoy ad oyow ogkapongaan kud on ka katondanan ku woy to sikan no igpohimu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. No ian to oyow ignangonnangon kud on ka Maroyow no Nangnangonon to sikan no igkohoy–u to Magboboot to mgo otow.
talagdok
Magaan ogkatuman on ka sika pagkoonan to mgo Hudiu no oghingaran dan ka Pagkoonan to Paligad. Dio nigdolog to lunsud to Hirusalim ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no ogligkat to mgo hilit, mgo mallintok no lunsud. Nighondio woy nigbunsud ka Pagkoonan oyow oghimuon dan ka batasan to mgo Hudiu to oghugas oyow ogpakatangko sikandan ka Magboboot ko ogpakasolod to Dakol to Ampuanan ko ogpokouma on ka pagkoonan.
libut
no
layang
No poglapas noy, dio koy nigbayo to marani to probinsia to Silisia woy ka Pampilia, no nigduung koy on dio to lunsud to Mira duon to probinsia to Lisia.
Pogdinog ni Hisus, nigsagdok kandin. Kagi rin, “Umawa now ka sikan no nabutud.” Nò, pig-umow ran ka nabutud no kagi ran kandin, “Sasindog kad su pohondion ka ni Hisus, karago ka.”
timtim
damag
Ka taloy-u, ogsabukan ta ka boi to taloy-u ko konò ki oglangub no og-insò.
Ko nighipanow si Hisus ligkat to Tiru no lunsud, dio mogdolog to Sidon no lunsud no nigparagas dio to Lanow to Galilia no oghondio to sikan no ugpaan no duon sampulu no lunsud.
tuga
Nasukubsukub, sukubon, Baagon ka igsukub ta.
Ulali-an kad solom ko wà duma nu.
Sikan ian to ogbuyu a kaniu to oyow ogsagbokoon now ro ka goinawa now oyow ogpokog-unawa ro ka doromdom now. Woy songo poun-unawooy kow to ogparakdakoloy to goinawa now. Woy pouy-uyunoy kow su oyow ogdakol on ian ka igkarago ku kaniu.
Nigsasindog on ka Labow to mgo talagpanubad duon to taliwaro no marani ki Hisus no nig-insaan din si Hisus to “Waro tabak nu? Nokoy ka salo nu no nighingaranan to soini no mgo ogtitigus?”
himu
kalipuan
Nigtabak si Simon ki Pedro to, “Ampui a now kun to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus oyow kono ad ogkoumaan to soini no iglogpad no innangon nu kanak.”
buyag
kubing
Di, og-awoson to ligkat to dakol no goinawa ta to mgo duma ta, ignangonnangon ta kandan ka tu-tuu ro ian su oyow ogpokounug ki lagboy to mgo batasan ni Kristu no ian ogkounawa to ulu ta.
Ian ka kagi ni Pilatu, su duon batasan dan to ogpalibuwason din ka sagboka no napirisu no taga Hudia ko ogpokouma ka sikan no Pagkoonan to Paligad.
Agad to Anak lagboy to Magboboot si Hisus di nakaanad to ogpaagad-agad su ligkat to igkabaybayari rin to pogtuman to insugu to Magboboot kandin.
Nahan now buwa ko ian inghongkai ku to tano oyow ogmaawang ka goinawa to tibo no mgo otow, dokad di kono su ogkabaadbaad ka mgo otow tongod koddi,” kagi ni Hisus.
No nigbabansagon ka mgo otow to igtabak dan di waro man mog–un–unawa ka igkatabak dan. No waro makasabut ka sikan no igbuyag to sundalu ko nokoy ka nigligkatan to samuk su mohon–ing ka ogkakagi. Sikan ian to impahatod din si Pablo dio to kampu to mgo sundalu.
hop-at
Tagawilì
Naan now buwa ko sikaniu ka ogligkatan to kinagian to Magboboot. Bak ko sikaniu ro ka noumaan to kagi rin.
lilid
Talag-anad to Balaod ka sagboka kandan. Niggawayan din porom si Hisus to mgo igtabak din to inso din kandin.
Ogpohondini on pad to Amoy ku ka Gimukud din pinabayo to ngaran ku no Kandin ka Talagbulig kaniu. Kandin on ka og-anad kaniu to tibo woy ogparoromdomon kow nikandin to sikan no innangon kud kaniu.
Mariu ka to agad nokoy no ogpakaayat to maroot no batasan, to ogpanhilabot to kono no asawa rin. Ian su ka duma no mgo salo, kono ogpakaligsom to lawa ta. Di ka sikan otow no oghimu to maroot, ogpakasalo to kandin no unoy no lawa.
kalatkat
Nigpitow ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din no kagi rin kandan to, “Agad publi kow kuntoon, duon dod igkarago now su nasakup kow on to Pogsugu to Magboboot.
Ka sikan no otow no nahan din no dakol on ka katagaanan din, ogkaalang-alang pad to katagaan din to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon.
No ligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot no og-ugpo kai to kanta no nigtuu, tantanuri nu ka sikan no pogtuu ta no tu-tuu ian no impatalipun din koykow.
digus
Paragasa now ka poghipanow now to maroyow no dalan oyow kono ogkabalabagan ka dalan to sikan no mgo otow no ogmalotoy pad to pogtuu ran. Ian su oyow ogkohogot atag ka pogtuu ran.
No, nighipanow si Hisus no nighutuk nighondio to doipag to woig to Hordan. Nighondio to sikan no nokani no nigbautismuan ni Huan no nig-ugpo do dio.
ko ogka-agapan ka, koykow ka ogsakoru.
Ka otow, du-on pamisli-on to kandin no lawa.
Ko og-alipolongan ki, ogkaligot ka baloy ko ogpitow ki.
Ka otow no ogngangalap to siak to woig, ogbokason din ka og-atangan din ka siak oyow og-otì on.
Mabogbog ka sikan no anak no igkaboros nu, no ogtokoron to sikandin ka Anak to Labow no Magboboot. Ogbogayan to Magboboot sikandin to katondanan to Labow no Igbuyag no ogkounawa to minuna rin no si Dabid.
Ko ogdinogon to gobirnador ka sika kagi, kanami on ka og-al-alukuy kandin oyow kono kow ogpabaybayaran nikandin.”
Nò, tagood to nigsumansuman dan pad ko noomonu buwa ka lawa ni Hisus, natokow sikandan to darua no otow no nigsasindog kai to longod dan. Ka kinabo to sikan no darua, nigmalayag lagboy.
pakang
Ko mahapun on nanhondio si Hisus mgo hibatoon din no sampulu woy darua to sika baloy.
No to tag sagboka kanta no sumpul to lawa ni Hisus, duon katouanan ta no ingkabogoy to Magboboot ligkat to pogkohoy-u rin kanta, di ogloinloin ka katouanan to tag sagboka kanta. Sikan ian, og-awoson ta no oghimuon ta ka ogkatouanan ta. Pananglitan, ko nabogayan kinow on to katouanan to ognangonnangon to kagi no ogligkat to Magboboot, og-awoson ta to ognangonnangon ki to kagi rin ko songo monu karakol ka pogtuu ta kandin.
Ko waro malopota to Magboboot ka mgo allow, ogkoubus ogkamatoy ka mgo otow to sikan no mgo igkabaybayari ran. Di nigpamalopotan din su nohoy-uan din ka mgo sakup din no nig-alam din.
To niglabung on dio to lamisaan, woy nigbunsud nigkoon, nigpurut si Hisus ka songo malison no paan no nigpasalamatan din pad ka Magboboot. Pogkaponga rin, nanlotiblotib din ka paan no nigbogayan din on ka duma rin no darua.
utol
To nigligad pad buwa ka songo simana no nigduma ni Hisus si Pedro, si Huan woy si Santiago no nigtakarog dan to bubungan su og-ampu to Magboboot.
Di duon sagboka no bailan dio no oghingaranan ki Simon. No pila on no tuid, no ungod nighimu to mgo pamulinganon no ingkabolongbolong to mgo otow to sikan no lunsud woy ka tibo to sikan no probinsia to Samaria. No nignangonan ni Simon ka mgo otow to sikandin kun ka mamabogbog.
langow
Inogo on no nigkikilat no nigdagsang on ka maagbot lagboy no balansì woy duon maagbot lagboy no dinug. Agad dongan to poghimu to an-anayan no otow taman kuntoon, waro pad aligbat no ogkounawa to sikan no kaagbot no dinug no ogkoumaan to tano.
bulung
Og-aguantoon to maistra ka batò no og-ungod og-inso-insò.
Ka malalab no kalasanon no manuk no maraging ka og-ukalò batug ka igngaran.
Mohon-ing lagboy ka mgo otow no nanduma kandin woy nigbawian din ka mgo nandaralu.
sokol ka goinawa
bulog
ugpa-an
Magaan ad on oglibong dio to tano. Sikan ian, hogota now ka pogtuu now kanak oyow kono ogkaagow ka sikan no igsayo ku kaniu.
Kagi pa ni Hisus kuwo to mgo hibatoon din, “Kono kow ogkasasow dio to goinawa now. Ogsalig kow nasi to Magboboot; songo salig kow koddi.
tu-an
pamasul
gogoyangas
logon
tuang
Nò mgo sulod no igdakoli ku to goinawa, su duon soini no og-im-imanan ta, hogota now ka pogsalig now ki Hisus oyow kono oglimanglimang ka goinawa now to pogtuu now. Ungod now poomoti to ogtuman to igpohimu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta kaniu su nataga kow man to, ka tibo no oghimuon ta to igsugu din, duon pulus ta.
tamban
Woy si Simon no Siloti woy si Hudas Iskarioti no ogpanabod ki Hisus.
Tungulon ka ubal.
alunggun
Og-awoson to ungod kinow ogkarago su duon pog-iman-iman ta to pogkouyag ta uromo. Og-awoson to og-aguantoon ta ka mgo igkabaybayari ta, woy ungod ki og-ampu to Magboboot.
Nigtabak si Pilatu kandan to, “Dumaa now ka mgo sundalu woy paay-ayari now sikandan to pogtamong to sabalanan din.”
No sikan ka igmasalig din to pogtuu now oyow ko oglibong kai ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus no ogdumoon din ka tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu kandin, ogkohimu on no waro igmaroot to Magboboot kaniu woy to matuwarong kow ko dio kow on to tangkaan din, no ian Amoy tanow.
Ma-aguantoon ka Magbobo-ot.
Pogkaponga, impasasindog dan ka mgo otow no og-uubat no ogpamalogot to igbayung dan ki Istiban. Kagi ran to mgo pogbuyagon dan to, “Ka soini no otow, og–ungod din ogdoot to soini no Dakol no Ampuanan no nig–indanan to Magboboot. Woy ogdooton din ka Balaod ta no niggalat ni Moisis.”
Nignangon man do si Hisus to dangob no pananglitan. Kagi rin to, “Ka Pogsugu to Magboboot, ogkounawa to igpatulin to paan; ko ig-amut to dakol no harina, ogtulin ka tibo no pigmasa no harina.”
bakulù
Di ko kono din pad ogsugut kandan, nangoni nu ka tibo no mgo sulod to pogtuu ko ogkalimud kow. Di ko kono pad sikandin ogsugut to ignangon to tibo no mgo sulod to pogtuu, balagara nu sikandin woy doromdoma nu no ogkounawa sikandin to waro nigtuu to Magboboot woy ko ogkounawa sikandin to mgo talagkubla to bayad to buhis.
kalunsawi
bunnit
Ko ungod ta ogdoromdomon ka pog-unug ta to Magboboot di ko og-ogotan ki to igbuyag ta agad to waro salo ta, ogkohoy-uan ki to Magboboot ko og-aguantoon tad ka igkabaybayari ta.
Ko nigngangang ka busow agad ko nigkomoron ka bato, niglibuwas on ka busow. Di ogkounawa to namatoy ka bato no kagi to duma no mgo otow to “Namatoy on.”
Ko dakol ka igko-untud to gakit, ogka-agod-od on.
gokut
golang
Di sikaniu mgo sulod, kono kow og-iling to mgo otow no ogkatokawan to ogpanakow, su waro kow mog-ugpo to karusiloman no kono kow atag poron ogkatokawan to sikan no allow to poglibong to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta
kolis
Ko nigponga ka soin no in-anad ni Hisus no igmasakit to goinawa to mohon-ing no mgo otow, nighihipanow on woy si Hisus dio do to Galilia. Kono dan oghihipanow dio to Hudia su ka mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu, ogkoiniatan dan porom to oghimatoy ki Hisus su ka in-anad din.
Woy kono ki ogmoub-ubatoy su, ko kinabo pa ka tahan no mgo batasan ta woy ka tahan no ogkoiniatan ta no maroot, nigluung tad on.
‘Ka soini no namoori no nigtalabau, songo oras do ka talabau ran no nigbogayan nu rod to unawa to imbogoy nud kanami no nigtalabau koy atag to tibo no allow no nakarampil koy to moinit no allow.’
tutung
hibat
Nataga sikandan to tahan do no ogbobootan to Magboboot ka mgo otow no oghimu to sikan no maroot no mgo batasan, no ogkalogparan sikandan to waro katamanan. Di ogparagason dan ka poghimu ran to sikan ian no mgo maroot no batasan dan. No kono do no sikan ka oghimuon dan di songo maroyow to goinawa ran ko duon dangob no otow no songo oghimu to ogkounawa to batasan dan.
Ko og-oopad ka sikan no hop-at, ka kawaan woy hop-at no mgo pogbuyagon, ogluhud to tangkaan to Lagboy no Igbuyag no ogpinpinnuu to sikan no pinnuuan din to pogboboot. Ogsimboon dan sikandin no ian ka kono ogkamatoy taman to waro katamanan. Woy og-awoon dan to ulu ran ka bulawan no mgo tangkulu ran no igpanabuk dan dio to tangkaan to Lagboy no Igbuyag no kagi ran to,
Nigtabak si Hisus kandin to maralom no kagi, “Ka maroyow, ian ta ogpakoonon pad ka mgo bato. Kono ogkaayun ko igbogoy ta ka koonon dan dio to mgo asu.”
Tantanuri now, hogoti now woy manokala now ka pogtuu now no kono now ig-ulung-ulung.
gitò
Nigtabak ni Hisus kandan tibo to, “Tuu kow ro to Magboboot; salig kow kandin.”
Agad nokoy allowa, duon ka mgo publi kai to kaniu. Di sikoddi atag, kona ad no ogmalugoy kai to kaniu.
dollog
Sayo-on nu ka anak nu.
Dokad di ka sikan no otow atag no ogpakanangon to sikan no kagi no ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot to kanta no kinagian, ogkakagian din ka mgo duma rin. Ian su oyow ogkohogot ka pogtuu ran woy ogkoudlingan sikandan, woy to oyow ogkabuligan ka goinawa ran no ogmasakit.
Ka ku kow kaniu no mgo taga Galasia no naawo on ka pogdoromdom now! Hontow ka nigpasuwoy kaniu to pogtuu now to ogpounugon kow porom to Balaod ni Moisis? Di tahan on man nigbat-awan ka goinawa now to innangon noy ka pighimu ni Hisu Kristu no niglansang sikandin dio to krus.
Ogkohoy-uan sikaniu no ungod kow ogsayaa to mgo otow kuntoon, su kounawa ian ka pighimu to mgo apu ta dongan no ungod dan sayaa ka ubaton no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot.”
upul
Ogmalayaton ta ka goinawa ta to mgo duma ta. No ko duon igkabolu ta to agad hontow, og-awoson no ogpasayluon tad on sikandin unawa to nigpasaylu kinow on to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.
Nigparagas si Huan no nigkagi to, “Ko malogot ian no pig-ongkoran now on ka mgo salo now, ogkakitaan porom pinabayo to maroyow no oghimuon now.
No-ua nu su malasi ogpanumbaoy.
“Malogot ka soin no kagi ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “to ogpasayluon to Magboboot ka tibo no mgo salo to mgo otow; agad ko ogsumpaliton dan ka Magboboot, ogpasayluon din.
Timoteo, doromdoma nu ka soini: ka katamanan no mgo allow, ogkoumaan ka soini no kalibutan to dakol no igkabaybayari.
tulù
Nignangon si Hisus to, “Magaan ad on oglibong. No ogkapulusan ka mgo otow no ogtuman to soini no impanoy ku impanangonnangon ku to soini no diblu.”
aku
Ka buyag no otow, konad ogpoko-orol ka oghipanow su mamasakit on ka bu-ol din.
Di nigbalibad si Huan no ogbautismu ki Hisus no kagi din to, “Kono ogkohimu no sikoddi ka ogbautismu koykow. Sikoykow porom ka ogbautismu koddi,” kagi ni Huan.
Ka Magboboot no nig-abin kanta ka ogtuman to soini su ogkasaligan tad.
ubun-ubun
To sika no allow no nig-awo on si Lot to sikan no lunsud to Suduma, namatoy on ka tibo no mgo otow dio to ugpaan to Suduma su nigpouranan to Magboboot ka ugpaan dan to hapuy mgo batu no asupri no niglogdog no nigligkat to langit.”
Nokouma on sikandan dio to lunsud to Episu. No duon mogsuwoy si Pablo ki Akila daruwa ki Prisila. Di woy mogmasusuwayoy, nighondio pad si Pablo to anaranan to mgo Hudiu no nigmaal–alukuyoy to mgo Hudiu tongod ki Hisus.
Dakol ka pulus ku ki Niya su kandin ka ogkasaligan ku
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin to, “Manio no og-insaan a nu ko nokoy ka maroyow no oghimuon nu? Duon sagboka ro no maroyow, waro duma. Ian do ka maroyow ka Magboboot. Ko ogkoiniatan nu no ogkabogayan ka to kouyagan no waro katamanan, tumana nu ka mgo sugu to Magboboot.”
Si Eliud amoy ni Eliasir. Si Eliasir amoy ni Matan. Si Matan amoy ni Hakub.
Di kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Kaniu ka ogpapitow dio to mgo otow to maroyow kow, di ka Magboboot ka ogkita kaniu ko nokoy ka duon to goinawa now, su sikan so igparakoldakol dio to goinawa to mgo otow ro, maroot lagboy dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.”
pungul
Sosokod kow
Sini nud kai.
Diò to kanami, woy ogkatahuron noy ko noimu on no pogbuyagon.
buntiak
Oghitagoon ta ka duma ta to du-on magaliug ta no nigdatong.
Sikan no otow no ogmolintokon din ka goinawa rin to kandin no ngaran no og-iling sikandin to soin no bato, sikandin ian ka dakoldakol to Pogsugu to Magboboot.
Pagintu-tu-u ka kagi nu
No ka mgo otow no nalimud, warad nigtabak su ogpamminog ki Pablo daruwa ki Birnabi no imbatbat dan ka tibo no impohimu to Magboboot kandan no mgo kabolbolonganan woy ka mgo indanan no igmalogot to kinagian din to dio pad sikandan to mgo ugpaan to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu.
Si Silbanu ka nigbulig kanak to ogsulat to soini no malopot no sulat. Natagaan ku to masalig sikandin no sulod ta to pogtuu ki Hisu Kristu. No ian to nigsulat a kaniu to soini su oyow ogkohogot ka pogtuu now. Woy ogpohitagoon ku sikaniu to tu-tuu ian ka soini no pogkohoy-u to Magboboot. Gongoni now ro ka sikan no pogkohoy-u rin.
Kagi to diwata no si Gabriel to, “Maria, ko ka ogkahallok su nohoy-uan kad on to Magboboot
Du-on mgo litaratu no igpakang ta to alabat no igmaroyow to pogpitow.
Pananglitan, agad boi woy ko lukos, ko duon duma ta no ogtuu ki Hisus no maroot ka sabinit din woy ogkoiluan to mgo ogkakoon din,
Duon songo Allow to mgo Hudiu to Oghimoloy no nighondio si Hisus to baloy to songo labow no Parisiu su ogkoon dio. Ka tibo no mgo otow dio, ogbantoy kandin ko ogmonuon din.
Wà pad matumpis ka diblu.
lanow
Songo karukiloman nighondio ka sikan no lukos ki Hisus. Kagi rin ki Hisus, “Maistru, nataga koy on to koykow ka maistru no insugu to Magboboot su kono ka ogpokohimu to sikan no mgo koin-inuan ko waro ka Magboboot dio to koykow.”
Kono now kalingawi to impanoy ku innangon kaniu ka tibo soini no dio a pad to kaniu.
latun
Ka otow, niggoram to nalubò ka baloy rin no nigtigbas din ka bakosan.
tungul
Kasinasow ka babuy ko du-on kamatoy
Nigtabak si Hisus to maralom no kagi. Kagi rin, “Ko oggulakon now ka soin no baloy to Magboboot, oghimu a oghutuk to tatolu ro no allow.”
Naposò ka sakaru.
Pogkouma woy ni Pablo dio to Antiokia, impalimud dan on ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no nigbatbatan dan sikandan to tibo no impohimu to Magboboot kandan dio to nabayaan dan woy to nigbuligan sikandan oyow songo nignangonnangonan on ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu tongod ki Hisus oyow songo ogkohimu kandan to songo ogtuu on.
Ogkabuì ki.
No ko igpambogoy ku ka tibo no kalaglagan ku dio to mgo ayuayu, woy ko igbogoy ku to ogpasilaban ka soini lawa ku su ligkat to pogtuu ku ki Hisus, di ko waro goinawa ku to mgo otow, songo waro pulus ku.
Nighun-a on nig-uli si ino su nigdugsunan on.
tobtob
likù
Ka molungangon, konò no ubaton, konò ogwangal, ogkaallok no oghimu to maro-ot, ogpo-obos.
Pogsakoy ni Hisus to balutu dan, nighangyu ka lukos no warad on mgo busow to lawa rin ki Hisus to ogduma porom kandin.
pulalas
sakolow
bukad
Sikan ian, og-awoson to og-ayad-ayad ki ro to ogpamminog to sikan no ogkagi no ian ka Magboboot su ka mgo otow dongan no waro nigpamminog to kagi rin no impanangon din ki Moisis, niglogparan sikandan. No sikanta kuntoon, dakoldakol pad man ka iglogpad kanta ko og-iniug ki to Magboboot no ogbohog kanta no ogligkat dio to langit.
Kagi ni Pablo to, “Ko nataga a pa to Labow no Talagpanubad ka nigkagi, waro a poron nigkagi to sikan su duon ingkasulat no kinagian to Magboboot to, ‘Kono now maroota ka igbuyag now.’ ”
Oggusi-on tad ka galung ta no pula no ogkito-on tad ka moon-ing no alibutod no og-aliboodbood on.
Kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Agad hondoi, ogtahuron ka mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot di kono ogtahuron to mgo otow dio to kandin no lunsud. Agad mgo sulod din, mgo og-ugpo to kandin no baloy kono dan ogtahuron sikandin.”
Nò, duon nigdinog ku no maagbot no lagong no nigligkat to langit no nignangon to, “Kuntoon, nigdatong on ka pogpangabang to Magboboot, woy igpohitaga rin on ka kabogbogan din to og-alap to pandatuan din. Woy impohitaga rin on to si Kristu, no ian ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan, sikandin ka nigbogayan to Magboboot to katondanan din to og-alap to pandatuan din to soini no kalibutan. Ian su indogpak on si Satanas no ungod ogsasindog to tangkaan to Magboboot to maallow woy ka marusilom no ogbayungbayung to mgo sulod tanow to pogtuu.
Sikan ian ka ingkasulat to kinagian to Magboboot ki Abraham dongan to: “Oghimuon ku sikoykow no kaap-apuan to mohon-ing no mgo otow no dio to agad hondoi no mgo ugpaan no ogloinloin ka gobirnu.” Sikan ian, dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, ka mgo otow no songo ogtuu kandin, ogkohimu on no mgo pinanganak ni Abraham. Nò, ka Magboboot no nigtuuan ni Abraham, ian dod ka Magboboot no og-uyag to mgo otow no nammatoy, woy ligkat to kagi rin, oghimuon din ka waro pad nohimu.
dabuk
Nigsugu on ni Hisus kandin to, “Onow kad; sasindog ka, honata nu ka ikam nu no uli kad on.”
tabolog
Kasikat ka kandiru; ko-it is
Ian su tongod ki Kristu, pigbogayan kow to kohoy-u no kono ogligkat do to pogtuu now di songo ogligkat to ogkabogayan kow to mgo igkabaybayari tongod to pogtuu now kandin.
Songo allow nig-ampu si Hisus dio to awayan no ka mgo hibatoon din do ka nigduma. Nig-inso si Hisus kandan to, “Hontow a to goinawa to mgo otow?”
lawa-an
Oglinglingutan to mgo tamo-ing ka kiambù no nigsoloran ku.
Unawaa now ka batasan now to batasan to Amoy now dio to Langit no ogkohoy-u to mgo otow. Songo kohoy-ui now ka agad hondoi no otow.”
su ka Amoy ku, dakol so goinawa rin kaniu. Dakol ian so goinawa rin kaniu su dakol man so goinawa now koddi woy su nigtuu kow to nigligkat ad dio to kandin.”
Nig-u-ulunan ka batu
sugkad
Duon mgo boni no nakasawod dut batuon no tano. Magaan nigtubu su manipis do ka basak.
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi din to, “Sikaniu no kuntoon no mgo otow, dakol lagboy ka sayop now. Malogot ian no waro pogtuu now koddi. Kapilaan a pad dini to kaniu? Kapilaan a ro no ogpakaantus a kaniu? Alapa now ka bato kai.”
Nigmoin-insooy ka mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu no ogsawayan dan no kagi ran, “Oghondoi buwa og-ugpo ka soin no lukos no kono ta ogkitoon sikandin? Ka goinawa rin buwa ian to oghondio to duma ta no mgo Hudiu no nakaamut to mgo Griego no otow. Og-anaron din buwa ka sikan no mgo Griego.”
hagomhom
Aligu ka ro du-on su du-on naka-atang no batang.
uyun
Ko du-on otow no nakasalò no ogdakopon ta, ogkagi ki to, “Konò kad og-atu su no-upul kad on no nalingutan kad on.”
Di ko ogkagi ki to, “Waro a makasalo,” ogkounawa to oghimuon ta ka Magboboot no ubaton su wa ki nigtuu to kagi rin tongod to duon salo ta.
Ogdiri-ok ki to homoy no naga-ani oyow igkarampil pad ka lupogas to homoy.
bokog
on
boluk
palongpalong
Ka batò no ogsubla ka mo-init to lawa, ogsilsil ka mo-init. Mo-init ko ogdagkot ta ka bolad ta diò to lawa rin
kasal
gomow
Ogpapangumusta a ki Tripina woy si Tripusa. Maali sikandan no mgo suguanon to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. Songo ogpapangumusta a ki Pirsida no songo indakoli ku to goinawa. Dakol ka nohimu rin to pogtuman din to igpohimu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
binanga
Ko ogpakatood no ka tibo, ogpakapariralom on ki Hisus no ian Anak to Magboboot, songo ogpariralom on si Hisus to Amoy rin no nigparoog kandin to tibo, oyow tibo ogpakapaagad-agad on to Magboboot.
Patulù koy to homoy.
Kagi to mgo Parisiu ki Hisus, “Kono no malogot ka ogkagion nu su ogligkat do to koykow no goinawa ka ogdoromdomon nu to ogkagi to soini. Ogtitigus ka ro to koykow no goinawa.”
Sikaniu ka makapurut to Balaod to Magboboot no impahatod to mgo diwata din, di waro now paag–agari,” kagi ni Istiban.
No pogpitow ku man do to Nati no Karniru, no ogloko to sikan no igkalalimma no imparokot to sikan no ogbasoon. No dio to diralom to tubaranan, nigkita ku ka mgo gimukud to mgo otow no nigpanhimatayan su nigtuu sikandan to kinagian to Magboboot woy su nasaligan sikandan to immalogot dan to sikan no kinagian din.
Ka otow n ogtagkas to baluy, woy ko lumrun, ighimu rin to dala-us no ogtagu-an to boni no homoy.
tubod
Nigduma rin si Pedro, si Santiago, woy si Huan do. Masakit lagboy so goinawa rin woy naaras lagboy sikandin.
tapias
Pogduung noy dio to Asun, nigtagbu koy ni Pablo. No nigpasakoy noy on sikandin no nigparagas koy on ka nighondio to lunsud to Mitilini.
lanut
Di nigtabak si Pablo kanami to, “Manio to ogsinagawan a now to lagboy no ogmasakit so goinawa ku ko ogsinogow kow? Agad kono do no igkapirisu ku ro, di impanoy kud on ka goinawa ku ko oghimatayan ad dio to Hirusalim tongod to pogtuu ku to ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.”
Sikan ian to nataga kid on to kono ogkohimu ka otow no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot ko ligkat to pogtuu rin do duon ko waro ogpakalagkos no oghimuon din.
sinikot
Pogkokoon dan, nigkagi si Hisus to “Ignangon ku kaniu to duon sagboka kaniu kai no igpanabod a rin, sagboka kaniu no duma ta to ogkoon kai kuntoon.”
sinaliabat
dogos
Kuntoon, tongod to soini no lawa ku, balagad ko duon mgo igkabaybayari ku no og-awoson to og-aguantoon ku. Ian su ka pog-aguanta ku no igkabaybayari, ogpakabulig kaniu. Sikan ian to dakol ka igkarago ku su ogkapongaan kud ka kanak no igkabaybayari no igpatuman ni Hisus kanak su oyow ogkabuligan ka mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisu Kristu no ian ta oghingaranan to lawa rin.
Ko ogpinnu-u ka asu, tibò igtukog to tanò ka pa-a rin.
bogbog
pangayungpù
bangbang
songo aslag
Pogkaponga rin, nighinggat din on sikandan dio to libuwasan. Kagi to talagbantoy to, “Ogmomonu a oyow ogkapangabangan a?”
Agad matikang woy ko masagkop, makopal woy ko manipis no igliu to baloy woy ko lama, ogkohingaranan no alad.
Ka sikan no timpu no ogkakagi ka mgo otow to maroyow on ka pog-ugpo dan no warad on samuk, magaangaan on ogkoumoi sikandan to sikan no ogpakaraat to pog-ugpo dan. Ian ogkounawaan ka boi no ogkaboros on no magaangaan on ogkouma to ighayori rin. Waro agad hontow no ogpakabutulas to sikan no igkabaybayari ran.
Ka soini, kono no ignangon ku kaniu to kono no litos ka pog-ugpo ku su natagaam ad to agad nokoy ka pog-ugpo ku no ogmaroyow ro ka goinawa ku.
Pogdinog to mgo pogbuyagon to mgo Hudiu to tabak ni Pedro daruwa ki Huan, nabolongbolong lagboy sikandan to kono ogkahallok woy si Pedro no ogtabak, woy su nataga to waro mokoungod to pog–iskuila ran, woy su kono no dakol ka ngaran dan. Sikan ian to nigtokod to mgo pogbuyagon to, si Pedro woy si Huan, nigdumaruma nokani ki Hisus.
kolit
nipis
Sul-ug ad to woig nu.
Di ko duon balu no ian din do ogdoromdomon ka agad nokoy no igkarago din no kono no litos, agad waro pad mamatoy di ogkounawa to namatoy on sikandin.
Nò, ka igkohon-om no diwata to Magboboot, nighiup din ka bungag no niggongonan din. Poghiup din, duon nigdinog ku no kagi no nigligkat dio to sikan no hop-at no sungguk to sikan no bulawan no tubaranan no duon to tangkaan to Magboboot.
Pakow to niug ka ighimu to walis.
panata
ligow
goinawa
To magaliug a rio to ugpaan now no waro ogdatongan ku wara a now palopawa to baloy now. Nigdaralu a woy napirisu ad, di wara a now panumbalayi!’
sugpang
Nò, niglingi ki Hisus no nig-inso, “Buyag, hontow buwa ka ogpanabod koykow?”
lugtì
Labow to tibo, og-awoson no oghogoton tad on ian ka pogparakdakoloy ta to goinawa. Ian su ko igdakoli ta to goinawa ka mgo duma ta, agad mohon-ing ka salo dan kanta, ogkohimu no ogkapasaylu ta sikandan.
sulip
No ligkat do to pogkamatoy ni Hisus dio to krus, naroog din on ka agad nokoy no ogpakaalap to kabogbogan. No ka sikan, impapitow to Magboboot dio to tangkaan to tibo.
Ka duma no mgo ugpa-an no no-umaan to allow, warò ogkako-on su mammara ka mgo tanò dan.
alimongow
busbus
Woy duon man do dangob no nigtabak to, ‘Iam a pad matuun, sikan ka kono a ogpakaamut to pagkoonan din.’ ”
Agad hondoi, ko ogkoumaan sikandin to busow, og-usungon sikandin dio to tano no ogbubuko so bo-bo din woy ogkagot ka ngipon din woy ogkolog ka lawa rin. Nig-inso kud ka mgo hibatoon nu oyow ogdogilon dan porom ka busow, di waro makarogil.”
Ka asu no manggianak, ko ogmago-on ka anak din, ogli-agon din ka anak din. Oghimlungan to ogkagat ka anak din.
To diad on sikandan to bubungan, pogkita ran pad ki Hisus, no nahalin ka langlanguwan din. Ogmalusigsig ka langlanguwan din no ogkounawa to allow woy nigmaputi lagboy ka sabinit din.
Ko lumansad, ian igbalangit ka bulbul to laku no igtoluk to manuk oyow mabulut.
Ogpasayu ki to ogparigus to masolom su warò pad otow.
Pa-agbason nu ka kawad diò to limang to timbabakal din.
Ka nigkita rin no sulat, nig-ay-ayaran pitawa oyow kono` ogsuloysuloy su songo ogsulat to nangnangonon.
Sikan ian no dio nigbayo woy si Pablo to longod to probinsia to Misia no nigtopak on to lunsud to Troas.
Nohimu soini dio to Bitania no lunsud, dio to doipag no woig no oghingaranan to Hordan su dio ka ogpabautismuanan ni Huan to mgo otow.
taman to ogkasagboka ro ka pogtuu ta woy lagboy kid ogtokod to Anak to Magboboot no si Hisus, no ogmasalig on ka mgo batasan ta no ogpokounug ki lagboy ki Kristu.
dusilom
komi
Kandin ka innangon to sika nigsugu to Magboboot no si Huan. Nigbansagon si Huan no kagi rin, “Soini ka innangon ku kaniu. Nigkagi ad to, ‘Sikan no ogpakasundul koddi, niglabow pad ka katondanan din to koddi no katondanan su duon on sikandin woy a nootow, tahan on sikandin.’ ” kagi ni Huan.
No si Hisus no bato pad, nigtulin on woy nigmasalig on ka lawa rin. Songo nigmasalig on ka natouan din su nigbulig ka Magboboot kandin.
Hondoi ka malomu no kagi ku to soin no nigkolog so lawa rin, ko ignangon ku to, ‘Napasayluan ka mgo salo nu’ woy ko ogsugu a to, ‘Onow kad on; honata nu ka hibatanan nu no hipanow kad on?’
Dokad di, pignangonan on woy si Pablo to tuud dan. Sikan ian to nigpallaguy on no nighondio to mgo lunsud to Listra woy to Dirbi. Woy nanagpitsagpit sikandan to mgo lunsud to probinsia to Likaonia woy ka mgo lunsud no nakamarani to sikan no ugpaan.
No kuntoon,’ kagi ni Ananias kanak to, ‘Nokoy ka ogtagaran nu? Sasindog kad on woy pabautismu kad on woy sampitan nud on ka ngaran ni Hisus oyow ogpasayluan din on ka mgo salo nu.’ ”
Ian do ogkoiniatan to mgo Hudiu to ogpaap–apuloy ki Pablo tongod to kandan no tinuuan woy tongod to songo otow no oghingaranan ki Hisus no namatoy, di to ognangon atag ni Pablo to manokal dod.” kagi ni Pistu.
Ko du-on manggad no manipis, mo-ilag ka pogpitow ta su oglagbas ka ma-awang.
Pogpitow ni Hirodis to narago ka mgo Hudiu to namatoy on si Santiago, nighutuk din man do no iparakop din si Pedro. Ka sikan, nakasangan to pagkoonan to mgo Hudiu no oghingaranan dan to Pagkoonan to Paan no waro Igpatulin.
Di ian ku ro ingkabatuk ku tongod ki Pablo, to waro man hinimuan din no litos to igkamatoy rin woy songo waro salo din litos to igkapirisu rin. Ian do igbayung dan ki Pablo ka tongod do to kandan do no balaod to mgo Hudiu.
sa-ad
Du-on ban to miow
Kagi to mgo otow ki Hisus to, “Dio to libuwasan ka inoy nu woy ka mgo hari nu. Ogpohondio ka poron.”
Niglingi ka lukos no nigkagi to, “Hoo, ogkitoon ku ka otow di ogkounawa sikandan to mgo kayu no oghihipanow.”
agbas
Pogkalugoy, nigduung koy on to lunsud to Sirakusa, no tatolu no allow ka in–ugpo noy.
Pogkarinog ni Hirodis to kagi to anak ni Hirodias, nokogsolsol so goinawa rin. Di tongod to imparinog din ka impangulibot din to tibo no mgo magaliug din, nigsugu to ogbogayan ka dalaga to pigbuyu din.
Dakol man poron ka pulus to nootow ki no Hudiu, su to kabinunsuran, nigsaligan kinow to kinagian to Magboboot.
tapid
No kagi ni Hisus to Amoy rin dio to Langit to, “Amo, pasaylua nu ka mgo otow su waro dan matagoi ka oghimuon dan.” No dio to tano nighantak ka mgo sundalu ko hontow ka ogmakaabin to mgo ilisan ni Hisus.
dawa
Nò, ka mgo otow no nanligad nigkolongkolong dan ka ulu ran woy nigsumpalit dan si Hisus.
Nò, pila pad buwa ka mgo allow ran dio, no kagi ni Pablo ki Birnabi to, “Maroyow ko oglibongan ta ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to nabayaan tad no mgo lunsud no an–anayan ta nanangonan to kinagian to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. Oglogobon tad ka mgo lunsud ko ogkoumonu on sikandan,” kagi ni Pablo.
No ko ognangonnangon ka dio to songo otow to si Hisus, ian ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, woy ogtuu ka dio to goinawa nu to nig-uyag to Magboboot si Hisus ligkat to kamatayon din, ogkapangabangan ka to iglogpad to Magboboot.
Ma-agkap ka kabil ku.
Nò, narago si Hirodis to pogkita rin ki Hisus su nalugoy on no ogkoiniat porom ogpitow kandin su nokani pad ian nakarinog si Hirodis bahin ki Hisus. No kuntoon, og-iman-iman on ko duon buwa igpakita ni Hisus ka songo kabolbolonganan.
Ian su ligkat to an-anayan to poghimu rin to soini no kalibutan, agad to kono ogkakitaan ka Magboboot, ogkitoon dod man ka kalaglagan no nighimu rin. No ligkat to sikan, ogkatagaan tad to sikandin ian ka Magboboot no waro katamanan to kabogbogan din. Sikan ian to kono ogpakaligal ka mgo otow ko ognangon poron to waro mataga sikandan ko duon Magboboot woy ko waro.
No si Abraham, agad to warad on poron nig-iman-iman to duon anak dan, di nigtuu rod to sikan no innangon to Magboboot kandin to ogbogayan sikandan to anak. Ligkat to sikan, ogkohimu on si Abraham no kaap-apuan to mohon-ing no mgo otow no ogloinloin no ugpaan unawa to impanoy innangon to Magboboot kandin to, “Ka mgo pinanganak nu, ogkounawa kohon-ing to mgo bituon no kono ogkasool.”
Ian su, ka sikan no mgo otow, kono no tu-tuu ian no suguanon ni Hisus, su mgo ubaton no igpapitowpitow ran do to suguanon sikandan ni Hisu Kristu.
Nig-awosan ku ka sinulaman.
pannugsing
hukas
galong
Nig-inbitalan koy ni Vivian to nigpapaninugtu.
Pogpitow ku no duon man do dangob no diwata to Magboboot no nigkita ku no niglayanglayang dio to aw-awangan. Nig-alap sikandin to sikan no Maroyow no Nangnangonon no waro katamanan. No dio din ignangonnangon to tibo no koot-otawan kai to kalibutan no ogkaloinloin to mgo otow, woy to mgo kapunganan woy to mgo kinagian woy to mgo ugpaan.
Sikaniu no mgo amoy, ko ogbuyu ka mgo anak now to koonon, kono now igbogoy kandan ka batu.
Sikandin, ka nigbogoy kanami to katondanan oyow ogpakaanad koy kaniu to sikan no iam no dalan no insabut din kanta. Di ka sikan, kono ogligkat to Balaod no ingkasulat dongan, di ogligkat atag to Gimukud to Magboboot. Ian su ligkat to sikan no Balaod, ian ta poron ogkoumaan ka kamatayon. Di ka Gimukud din atag ka ogbogoy kanta to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
Songo unawa ka nighimu to suguanon no nigbogayan to darua no libu. Woy songo nig-anak soini to darua no libu.
ganò
paga
sangal
Nigpaatawan sikandin no pigkita ka nikandin no ogtorongan nu sikandin to bolad nu. Woy og–ampuan nu oyow ogpakagimulat on ka mata rin,” kagi ni Hisus.
Di kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Waro kow makasabut to kalitukan to kagi now. Og-insa a kaniu ko ogpakaponod kow to unawa to igkoirapi ku? Agad og-insa a ko ogpakatuman kow to unawa to igbayo ku no ogpokouma ki to kamatayon ta?”
Ko du-on ogkatagbu ta diò to dalan no ogsinogow ka batò, no ogbuligan ta to og-imu-imù, sikan ka makuò ki to batò.
Ko naponga sikan, pigsugu on ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din to ogman-untud to balutu su oyow oghun-a sikandan ogtalipag dio to Bitsaida dio to limang to lanow no sikandin ka ogpohipanawon ka sika mohon-ing no mgo otow.
Ka otow no ayu-ayu no ungud og-ogoti, ko ogko-ugsoban on to goinawa rin no konad on ogpaka-aguanta ogpaka-atu on sikandin.
lampas
Waro man nigkita ran no igkabayung dan kanak. Songo kuwo do buwa ko nabolu kanak to nigsasindog a dio to taliwaro dan no nigkagi a to, ‘Nokoy naan to soini ad to tangkaan now kuntoon su og–in–insaan a now tongod to pogtuu ku to duon allow uromo no og-uyagon on to Magboboot ka mgo nammatoy,’ ” kagi ni Pablo.
talap
Di ko sikan ka goinawa now, natalap kow. Ogkagian ku sikaniu, ko kono now og-ongkoran ka mgo salo now songo unawa kow kandan no songo ogkamatoy kow ro.”
dayangdayang
so-ob
Ogpakalukbù ki ko ogkatabolog ki.
laman
Ko du-on ogbuyù to asin, agad do-isok, warò asin din.
hagsil
Poglonghag dan, si Hisus naan do ka nigkita ran, warad on ka sikan no darua.
sumpil
sayog
“Ian su pitow kow, nig–alap now kai ka soini daruwa no otow di waro dan takawa ka kalaglagan to mgo ampuanan ta woy songo waro dan doota ka inotow-otow ta no boi.
Ko og-asawa ka anak ku no lukos, ian amboy ku ka asawa rin.
Ko du-on oghimuon no oglalaron noy, tagsongo punduk, [o] suun.
alongaping
“Ka koddi no ig-anad atag,” kagi ni Hisus, “ko duon ignangon now to agad hontow otawa, kono kow ogpangulibot. Kono kow ogkagi to, ‘Hibot pad to langit woy ko hibot pad to tano’ su ka langit ian ka pinnuuanan to Magboboot woy ka tano ian ka og-unturanan to paa rin. Songo kono kow ogkagi to, ‘Hibot pad to lunsud to Hirusalim’ su ka Hirusalim ian ka lunsud to Magboboot no Labow no Igbuyag.
No ligkat to pogtuu to mgo pinanganak ni Israil to Magboboot, nakalapas sikandan to sikan no Malalab no Dagat no nig-otian to Magboboot oyow ogkounawa to tano no mammara no ogkabayaan dan. Di ka mgo taga Ehipto atag no nigpababaan to niggapon, nallonod on ka tibo su niglibong on ka dagat.
“Konò og-ulung-ulung.
Nigpakita man do si Hisus nighutuk dio to mgo hibatoon din dio to lanow no oghingaranan to Tibirias. Ka unawa to soini ka pogpakita rin kandan.
Mgo sulod no indakoli ku to goinawa, ka soini no ignangonnangon noy kaniu, kono no igpoomot noy no igpangabang to lawa noy. Di ko kai ki to tangkaan to Magboboot, ogpakamalogot sikandin to naayun tibo ka soini no innangonnangon noy su nigligkat to pogkasagboka noy ki Hisu Kristu. No ian do tuud noy to oyow ogkohogot ka pogtuu now kandin.
Sikaniu no mgo boi no duon on asawa, ipariralom now ka goinawa now to asawa now. Sikan ka litos no batasan to mgo boi no nigpasakup to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.
bugkòn
Ko og-os-os ka woig, du-on dod woig; oglibong diò to taan no lawa rin
tungow
pangalimug
bogoy
Ian su tongod to pog-atu now to salo, waro kow pad nakaatu taman to ogkamatoy kow.
nugun
Ka otow no makoddolon in walking, manokal no oghihipanow.
Ko oghipanow ka batò no ogli-ag no ogkawayon ka limang no pa-a, songo ogkabosì on.
songo baloy
biaw
Du-on tarapal no insob-ung to baloy ni Ena.
agok
no nigkagian ni Hisus ka mgo Parisiu woy ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod to mgo Hudiu to, “Og-inso a kaniu ko nokoy ka kagi to Balaod ta ko litos ko ogbawian ta ka otow no nigdaralu ko Allow ta to Oghimoloy woy ko kono?”
nu
Nigparagas nigkagi ni Hisus kandan. “Ko ogparokotan ta ka ilawan, og-insa a ko igholos ta dio to liang woy ko dio to diralom to sulambi? Kono kid! Dio ta isabuk to paga woy ko taliwaro to soog.
Ko’gtugkò ka gapas, konò ogkoimu.
gosi
Nò, ogmakagkagioy ka mgo duma no magaliug no kagi ran, “Hontow ka soini no otow no ogpasaylu to mgo salo to soin no boi?”
To kabinunsuran to kagi ku, ognangonan ku sikaniu to si Hisu Kristu ka dalan ku to oyow ogpasalamatan ku ka Magboboot tongod kaniu su dio to agad hondoi no ugpaan, duon mgo otow no ogpakanangonnangon tongod to pogtuu now ki Hisu Kristu.
nala
Ian su, agad to waro pad mootow si Libi, di to pogtagbu si Abraham ki Milkisidik, duon on si Libi to lawa ni Abraham no ian kaap-apuan din.
No to waro ki pad moumoi to soini kuntoon no pogtuu ta, noiling to napirisu ki pad to sikan no Balaod taman to nigpohitaga kid on to soini no pogtuu ki Kristu.
Mgo sulod, ipataliwaro ta to goinawa ta ka kinagian no in-anad ni Kristu. No ligkat to katouan no igbogoy to Magboboot, maan-anaroy ki woy moos-osonoy ki. No to mgo tod-om, woy mgo ulaging woy mgo kanta, ogsayoon ta ka Magboboot to sikan no mgo kinagian din no ingkasulat dongan woy ka kagi no ogligkat to Gimukud din no igpatagu to goinawa ta. No to tibo soini, ogpasalamatan tad on ian ka Magboboot.
Nigtabak si Hisus kuwo kandan. Kagi rin, “Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu. Waro a now pamitawa su nakasabut kow to sikan no ingkoin-inuan no nighimu kud. Namitow kow koddi su nallantoy kow on to paan.”
No, duon sagboka no otow dio to sikan no nalibulung no mgo otow no kagi rin ki Hisus to, “Maistru, nangoni nu ka kakoy ku to oyow ogtalaran a rin to ingalat to amoy noy no kalaglagan.”
hanulut
No sikoddi ian ka ogpaalap kaniu to sikan no innangon to Amoy ku, di ugpo kow pad kai to lunsud to Hirusalim taman to ogpokouma kaniu ka kabogbogan no ogpuun dio to Langit.”
Nigtagkos ku dò ka gout to mongo tirò nang-ad-ad ku to lobut to tu-od
Maga-an ogpakapangalung to kamatayon su layung og-u-unduk.
Niggoram a nokai to sikan no alap-ap no malintok a pad di nigbulungan ku to kayu no kapigsula no ogtubù diò to pantad.
nokal
Ian su si Kristu, nohimu on no otow no duon lawa rin. Di ka tibo no duon to Magboboot, songo sikan dod lagboy ka duon to kandin.
Kono kow ogpagawoy to goinawa now su ko duon sagboka kaniu no nahan din no dakol ka nasabutan din no ogligkat to katouanan to soini no kalibutan, maroyow ko og-iniugan din ka sikan no katouanan su oyow ogkapurut din on ka katouanan no ogligkat to Magboboot.
Ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta ka ogligkatan to maawang no goinawa ta, no ogbuyu koy to oyow, agad nokoy ka ogkabayaan now, ungod kow rin ogbogayan to sikan no maawang no goinawa now, woy to oyow layun kow rin ogdumaan.
No ligkat to sikan, natuman on ka impanangon to Magboboot to Tahan no Kasulatan to, “Nigtuu si Abraham to kinagian to Magboboot no sikan ian to nighingaranan on si Abraham no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot” woy “lagboy no sulod to Magboboot.”
Di si Ananias atag, nigpohitaga rin ka asawa rin to igholos din ka baad no salapi no imbayad to tano dan. No igbogoy rin ka samo dio to mgo suguanon ni Hisus. Sikan ian to ian naan do inhatod ni Ananias ka baad naan do no salapi, no dio din isabuk to tangkaan to mgo suguanon ni Hisus.
tikù
“Nò,” kagi ni Pablo, “Sikan dod ka tuud ku no nighondio ad to Damasku nokani. Ian su pigsugu a woy nabogayan ad to katondanan ku no nigligkat to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu oyow ogpanlogparan ku ka mgo otow dio no nigtuu ki Hisus.
No, natokow sikandan to duon diwata no suguanon to Magboboot no niglopow dio to kandan no nalayagan to karayow to layag no nigpuun dio to Magboboot. Nahallok lagboy ian ka sikan no mgo talagbantoy to ayam.
itom
Si Asor amoy ni Saduk. Si Saduk amoy ni Akim. Si Akim amoy ni Eliud.
Ka igbuyag din nignangon to, ‘Maroyow ka pighimu nu. Ogkasaligan ka no suguanon ku. Tongod to ogkasaligan ka to doisok no salapi, ogsaligan ku rod sikoykow to dakol. Hondini ka woy ogkatalaran ka to igkarago ku.’
Agad to nataga ka mgo otow to koddì ka tagtu-un to sikan no pinamula, pig-ubus dan abata ka impamula ku no bontung.
Songo duon mohon-ing no mgo boi no ogbantoy dio to mariu. Mgo matig Galilia sikandan no tahan no nigluyudluyud ki Hisus dio to dakol no lunsud to Hirusalim no nigbulig kandin.
hawi
No, ka mgo lukos no nigbantoy to babuy, pogkita ran ko noomonu ka pigbusawan woy ka babuy, nigpallaguy sikandan. Tibaan dan pannangoni ka dio to lunsud woy ka dio to mgo hilit.
tapus
tagngo-op
Ogbanbanayan ki oghimata su ogkapogul to og-onow.
tuga
tinda
No nataga ki to duon on igkarago to sikan no mgo otow dongan no waro nigsuwoy to goinawa ran. No ogdoromdomon ta ka sikan no dakol no pog-aguanta ni Hob to kandin no mgo igkabaybayari dongan. Woy songo ogtokoron ta rod ka maroyow no tuud to Magboboot ki Hob su dakol ka ingkohoy-u to Magboboot kandin.
hulin
Ka otow no layun ogpaagad-agad to mgo koiniatan to lawa rin, waro ogkohimu rin no igkarago to Magboboot.
Di ka sikan no nohimu, naayun to kagi no impasulat to Magboboot dongan to kagi rin to, “Waro pad makakita woy waro pad makarinog, woy songo waro pad makaroromdom ka mgo otow to sikan no intagad to Magboboot to mgo otow no indakoli sikandin to goinawa ran.”
Ko nigdinog, nigmanangnangonoy ka mgo igbuyag to talagpanubad, mgo Parisiu woy ka mgo dangob no igbuyag to mgo Hudiu. Kagi ran, “Ogmonuon tad buwa ki Hisus su mohon-ing ka igkoinuinu no oghimuon din.
Nig-inso kandan ki Hisus, “Hontow naan sikoykow?” Nigtabak ni Hisus no kagi rin, “Amana soin no mgo otow no ulit. Unawa ian to nokani no innangon ku kaniu.”
Di sikaniu atag, nigbogayan kow ni Kristu to Gimukud to Magboboot su boot ni Hisus. No sikan ian to nataga kow to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon.
Totorung to doun to saging.
Momonu kid?
balila
Sikan ian, maroyow ko sikanta no nigtuu ka ogbulig to sikan no mgo otow oyow ogkaalap dan ka soini no tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon.
ongkod
Songo allow, kagi to hari no anak din kuwo to amoy rin to, ‘Amo, ka kalaglagan nu no iggalat nu koddi uromo ko ogkamatoy ka, kuntoon a nu ro bag talari ka koddi no bahin.’ ” Nò, nigtalaran dut amoy ka darua no anak din to kandan no bahin.
Maniò to konò ogmangali?
ging-it
Nataga on to tibo no imbogoy nu koddi no dio ian mogligkat to koykow.
gonhow
Ognangon sikandan to, “Pitow ka naan. Koykow no oggulak to Dakol no Ampuanan woy igpasasindog nu ro to tatolu no allow, pangabangi nu naan ka koykow no lawa. Logsad ka duon to krus ko malogot ian to sikoykow ka anak to Magboboot.”
to
tanangow
ongot
Sikan ka innangon to Magboboot kandan,” kagi ni Sakarias, “ka innangon no igkohoy-u rin to mgo apu ta no minuna. Ogtumanon din ian su naroromdom din no duon intaga rin dongan ki Abraham
Kasongot ko korid nu
Ayad-ayad ka kandin su dakol ka pog-atu rin to in-anad noy.
Ko duon maroot no oghimuon to songo otow kanta, kono ta igsuli ka songo maroot. Di ian ta oghimuon ka batasan no ogkatagaan to agad hondoi no otow to maroyow no batasan.
Nig-agpas pamitawa ka kandin no kakoy no si Simon. No, kagi rin kuwo to sikan no kakoy rin, “Nigkita noy on ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan.” Ka Kristu ka dangob no kagi no un-unawa ka lituk to Im-imanan.
No to tibo no sulat ni Pablo, sikan dod ka innangonnangon din kaniu. Woy duon innangon din to sulat din no mohirap no ogsabuton. No ka mgo otow no kono ogpakasabut to malogot no nangnangonon woy waro ka mohogot to pogtuu ran, ogbalbalawan dan on ka tu-tuu oyow kono no oglitos ka lituk to sikan no ingsulat ni Pablo woy ka duma no insulat no kinagian to Magboboot. No ka ogkoumaan to sikan, ogkalogparan sikandan to mohirap no logpad.
kaba-kabà
Pananglitan ka sundalu, waro agad hontow kandan no ogpakabayad to kandin no lawa ko gobirnu ka ogsugu kandin. Woy waro man otow no ogpamula to boni din no kono ogpakakoon to bogas ko ogkoinug on. Woy songo waro tagtuun to kambing dio to kaniu no kono ogpoko-inum to gatas to mgo kambing din.
Nò, ka igkaruwa no diwata to Magboboot, songo nighiup to bungag din, no duon ka ogkoiling to dakol no bubungan no niglogdog no hapuy no ingkatugdo dio to dagat.
Ka amoy ni Huda, si Hakub. Ka amoy ni Hakub, si Isaak. Ka amoy ni Isaak, si Abraham. Ka amoy ni Abraham, si Tira.
dogos
sugpang
Nigpurut din ka ngalap no duon din do ian koona kai to tangkaan dan.
ogko-opos ka goinawa
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, to nigboot ad to kono a pad oghondio to kaniu ko ogkoiling dod to nokani no pogpanumbaloy ku no nakabogoy a kaniu to masakit no goinawa,
Ka soini no sulat, ligkat kanak no si Pedro no suguanon ni Hisu Kristu. Ogsulatan ku sikaniu no naabin to Magboboot no nokogsuwoy on dio to duma no mgo ugpaan. Dio kow makarolog to mgo ugpaan to Puntu, Galasia, Kapadusia, Asia woy to Bitinia.
Ian su uromo, ko ogbobootan to Magboboot ka soini no kalibutan, ka otow no kuntoon kono ogkohoy-u to duma rin, songo kono ogkakohoy-uan to Magboboot. Di ka otow no og-ungod ogkokohoy-u to duma rin, songo ogkakohoy-uan to Magboboot.
Sikoddi atag, ko igkalansang ad on dio to krus woy oglindogon dan on, ogpalimuron ku ka tibo no mgo koot-otawan dini to koddi su oyow ogtuu on porom.”
kutu
Dio to baloy nighibathibat ka boi no anogang ni Simon su moinit lagboy so lawa rin. Pogkouma ni Hisus nignangonan on sikandin bahin to sikan no nigdaralu.
Ko ogbugsi on ka bulutut, ogsolug to langosa ka nanò din.
Dakol ka abug ko moon-ing ka sakayan no ogbayò to kalasara no warò masimintu.
Kagi rin, “Papitawa a to salapi no putow.” No to impayag dan on, kagi ni Hisus, “Hontow no langlanguwan ka pig-ilingan to soini no salapi, woy hontow no ngaran ka ingkasulat dini to soin no salapi?” Kagi ran to, “Si Sisar, ka Punuan dio to Ruma.”
talogon
tarok
Sikan dod ka ingkasulat dongan no kagi rin to, “Kuntoon, ko ogdinogon now ka kagi to Magboboot, kono kow ogpagkol to goinawa now no ogkounawa to nohimu to mgo otow dongan no nanligal to innangon din.”
Lunsud a oghibat.
lahagn
togò
poros
Ka duma no boni, dio makasawod to maroyow no tano no nigpandagom woy nigtubu woy nigtuga. Ligkat to sagboka no boni duon mgo tagdoy no duon tag katoluan no bogas; duma, duon tag kahon-omon no bogas woy duon man do ka tagdoy no duon tag songo gatus no bogas to sikan sagboka no tagdoy.”
mugongmugong
lagboy
Ka makopal no kinabo ku no ig-akob no niggalat ku ki Karpu dio to lunsud to Troas, alapa nu ro ko oghondii ka. Ilagkos nu ro alapa ka mgo diblu ku, woy ka litos no ogkasulatan mgo nasulatan, su sikan ian ka lagboy no og-awoson ku.
Duon ka songo igbuyag to songo gatus no sundalu no nasasindog dio to tangkaan to krus. Ko nigkita rin ka inkamatoy ni Hisus, nigkagi to, “Malogot ian to Anak nanaan to Magboboot ka soin no lukos.”
Anoy a no batò, warò inoy ku no nigsagman kanak woy sagboka bag ka sabinit ku.
Mohon-ing ka mgo babuy no nigpamukal dio to masandig. Nigpohoy-uhoy-u ka mgo busow dio ki Hisus to, “Dio koy pasolora to sikan no mgo babuy.” Nighoo si Hisus,
luag
Nò, Buyag, ko nigmougtu on ka allow no duon koy on to dalan no oghondio a to Damasku, duon pigkita ku no layag no nigligkat dio to langit no nigsubla pad to layag to allow. Sikanak woy ka mgo duma ku to poghipanow, tibo koy nalayagan to sikan no layag.
kopal
Nò, tag sagboka kandan, nigbogayan to maputi no manggad no igpakinabo din. Woy nignangonan sikandan to oyow oghimoloy pad to malopot naan do no mgo allow. Ian su ogpatagaron sikandan ko songo monu pad no mgo duma ran no ogtuu to Magboboot ka songo ogkounawa kandan no ogkohimatayan.
pulù
Doromdom kow, mgo sulod. Ko duon otow no ogpakaroromdom to nig-abin ni Hisu Kristu sikandan, maroyow ko ogsumsumanan dan pad to songo noiling koy rod kandan su songo nig-abin koy rod man ni Hisu Kristu.
Kagi to mgo otow no mohon-ing to, “Huan, nokoy naan ka litos no oghimuon noy?”
Nò, pogpitow ku no duon diwata to Magboboot no nigpohulughulug ligkat to langit. Duon nig-alap din no susi to sikan no bitu no kono ogkatogkad ka karalomi rin. Woy songo duon nig-alap din no mabogat no karina.
tilongon
Duon dio to sika ugpaan sagboka no boi no taga Kanaan. Kono sikandin no Hudiu. Nig-agpas nighondio sikandin no ogtagbu ki Hisus. Kagi rin ki Hisus to, “Buyag, anak ni Dabid, kohoy-ui a bag su duon anak ku no boi no ogkabaybayaran lagboy su nigsoloran sikandin to busow.”
Nighognak no tanò.
Dakol dod poron ka igsulat ku koykow di kono a ogkoiniat to ogmalayaton ku.
Ian su ko, ogkitoon ki rin to ogkoon ki dio to baloy no ogkougpaan to inotow-otow, songo kuwo buwa ko ogpakasumansuman on kandin no songo ogkoon to sikan no ingkatubad to inotow-otow.
Sikan ian to mohon-ing kuntoon no mgo duma now no ogmalotoy, woy ka ogmandaralu, woy pila on ka nammatoy.
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Sikaniu, ko kono kow ogkita to kabolbolonganan, kona a now ogtuuan.”
lagkos to duon hapuy no oglogdog no ogpakaruma kandin. No oglogparan din on ka mgo otow no waro mogtokod to Magboboot, woy ka mgo otow no kono ogpaagad-agad to Maroyow no Nangnangon tongod to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.
Ian su ka sikan no mgo igkoibog to lawa ta, ogpakabalabag to igkoiniat to Gimukud to Magboboot. No ka Gimukud to Magboboot, songo ogpakabalabag to pogtuman ta to mgo maroot no igkoibog to lawa ta. Ogpous-usigoy ka sikan no daruwa, no sikan ian ka ogligkatan to kono kid ogpokohimu to litos no oghimuon ta porom.
Pogkaponga, no nanhipanow on woy si Pablo. No dio nigbayo to ugpaan to Pisidia taman to nokouma on sikandan dio to probinsia to Pampilia.
Di og-awoson to ogparagas a kuntoon, woy asolom, woy mapawo man do no oghondia a to Hirusalim su hondoi ka litos no oghimatayan ka songo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot ko kono dio to Hirusalim!” kagi ni Hisus.
kasal
We’ll be swept away by a wave of the Liboganon.
kalimma-an
palasan
sipit
No dio to taliwaro to sikan no mgo ilawan, duon nigkita ku no ogkoiling to otow. Ka kinabo din, dio taman to paa rin. No duon insalubabat no bulawan dio to sosolobon din.
Nò, nighipanow on ka sikan no mgo hibatoon din no oghondio to Hirusalim. Pogdatong dan dio nakitaan dan to unawa ka tibo no kagi ni Hisus kandan. Dio dan nigpanagana to iglabung dan to sikan no Pagkoonan to Paligad woy nig-uli on sikandan no darua.
No ka nokohun-a no magintalunan no nigligkat to dagat, nigbogoy to kabogbogan din dio to sikan no igkararuwa no magintalunan no nigligkat to tano to oyow ogkabogayan din to goinawa ka sikan no inotow-otow woy to oyow ogpakakagi on woy to oyow ogpakapohimatoy to agad hontow no kono ogsimba kandin.
Ko og-ilud ka batò, ogparuma ka bolad.
sulod
Ka lawa to sikan no daruwa no nammatoy, nakatuus do duon to kalasara to sikan no dakol no lunsud. No dongan, dio ilansang ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta to krus. Woy ian dod ka lunsud no songo ogpanag-iling to Suduma woy ko Ehipto.
su nahallok lagboy ka tibo ko nigkita ran sikandin. Di magaan nigkagi si Hisus no kagi rin, “Palibuwasa now ka goinawa now; ko kow ogkahallok; koddi do duon.”
ilun
lalow
An-anayan, duon ka nighimu rin no mgo suguanon ni Hisu Kristu. Igkaruwa, duon nohimu rin no talagnangon to kagi no ogligkat dio to kandin. Igkatolu, duon imbogoy rin no mgo talag-anad to kinagian din. Woy duon kabogbogan no imbogoy rin to duma no otow to oyow ogpokohimu to mgo kabolongbolonganan. Woy duon dod duma no ogbogayan din to kabogbogan to ogbawi. No to duma, nigbogayan to katondanan to ogbulig to mgo nigtuu. Woy duon duma no nigbogayan to oyow ogkatou no og-alap to katondanan. Woy duon ka nigbogayan din to oyow ogpakakagi to loinloin no mgo kinagian no waro dan maanari.
batbat
Ian su goinawa now to duon ka igmalogot to tu-tuu ian to ogligkat ki Hisu Kristu ka soini no ignangonnangon ku. No kono ogmalotoy ka kabogbogan din ko ogpakatangko ki kandin. Di dakol atag ka kabogbogan din no igpapitow rin kaniu.
Ko ogkagi ki to, “Wa man salo ku,” og-ubatan ta ro ka kanta no goinawa, no ka tu-tuu no nangnangonon, waro nig-ugpo to goinawa ta.
lokak
sikut
bonut
Kono ogkamatoy ka ias dio no ogkokoon to lawa woy kono ogkaparongan ka hapuy.”
gatus
kagi
Ko ogkapilak to mangayow, og-agbas ka kommag.
Woy dio to langit ogkitoon now ka indanan to sikoddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan, oglibong a kai to tano. Ka tibo no mgo koot-otawan kai to tano ogmansinogow ko ogkitoon a ran no nokountud a to mgo gapun no duon dakol no kabogbogan ku woy ogkitoon dan ka karoyawi ku.
Sikan ian no nanatutung on sikandan. No nigtungayawan dan ka ngaran to Magboboot su sikandin ka duon kabogbogan din to ogboboot to sikan no mgo igkabaybayari ran. Dokad di waro dan nasi balbalawi ka goinawa ran woy waro dan sayaa ka kabogbogan to Magboboot.
tonos
hat-al
panigbi
Di ka sikan no mgo ubaton no talag-anad, ogdooton dan ka agad nokoy no kono dan ogkasabutan. No ian dan ogkounawaan ka mgo ulod-ulod no og-ugpo to koilawan no waro boot. Ian su ko nokoy ka ogkoiniatan to lawa ran, ogtumanon dan. Nò, ka pulus to pogkootow ran ogkounawa rod man to pulus to sikan no mgo ulod-ulod no litos to ogkapurut woy to oghimatayan. Ian su ogkoumaan on sikandan to kamatayon dan no waro katamanan.
daral
tabu-uan
Mgo sulod, to kanak no doromdom, nataga a to maroyow on ian ka kaniu no mgo batasan. Woy nataga a rod to ogpakasabut kow on ian to kinagian to Magboboot, woy to ogkatou kow to ogpaan-anaroy.
No, nig-insaan ni Hisus ka sikan no mgo sakup to, “Waro kow pad makasabut to soin no pananglitan ku? Ogmonuon now naan oyow ogpakasabut kow to agad nokoy no pananglitan?
usilom
tugpa
liwati
“Kaniu no nahan now no ogpakasabut kow to tibo, manio to ogkatou kow ognangon ko ogmonuon angkuwan ka tano woy ka langit di kono kow ogpakasabut ko nokoy ka lituk to mgo oghimuon to Magboboot kuntoon?”
No kuntoon, duon ignangon ku kaniu tibo no malasi ku nanangoni tongod to pandatuan to Magboboot, to natagaan kud on to kono kid on ogpokogkita su kono ad ogpakalibong kai.
Mapipioy su malig-ot.
No duon soini no mgo sulod ta no ogsuguon ku dio to kaniu su oyow ogpakabulig kaniu to poglimud to sikan no igbogoy now. Ian su og-awoson to ogpakapanagana kow on oyow ogpakatuman on ka impanoy ku no innangon tongod kaniu woy to oyow kono ogkaraat ka pulus to pogsayo ku kaniu.
hilow
“Manio to waro ibaligya ka soin no mohomut to tatolu no gatus no putow no salapi. Naraat ian; nabogayan porom ka mgo publi to sikan no salapi.”
lubog
atang
Nigparagas nighipanow woy si Hisus no nighondio to baloy ni Hairu. Pogkakita ni Hisus to mgo otow no ogpamulondag woy to nasasow sikandan,
Ka amoy ni Sila, si Kainan. Ka amoy ni Kainan, si Arpaksad. Ka amoy ni Arpaksad, si Sim. Ka amoy ni Sim, si Noi. Ka amoy ni Noi, si Lamik.
Ka sikan, nohimu on no samuk no nigtangkap on to tibo to Hirusalim. Woy nandalapak on ka mgo otow dio ki Pablo no niggongonan dan sikandin, woy pigganoy ran on sikandin dio to libuwasan to Dakol no Ampuanan dan. No nig–agpas nalokobi ka ampuanan.
kurul
Di ko du-on ka igpangalasag, konò ki ogka-agkapan ka og-ugpò su ogmabogat ki to og-ugpò.
Nò, pogpitow noy to kono ogkapogongan si Pablo, nighagtong koy on, no nigkagi koy atag to, “Balagad on no ogboboot ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.”
Sikan ian no nigkamoy ran ka mgo duma ran dio to dangob no balutu su oyow ogbulig kandan. Nò, indulug dan ka dangob no balutu woy pighiponu dan on ka darua no balutu to mgo ngalap. Magaan on porom og-anlod on ka darua no balutu.
No sikaniu no mgo bato-bato pad, songo ignangon ku kaniu to paagad-agad kow to mgo pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu. No tibo kaniu no nigtuu ki Hisus, ogpoobos-obos kow to duma now woy pabulbuligoy kow, su duon ingkasulat to kagi to Magboboot to, “Og-atuan to Magboboot ka mgo otow no ogparakoldakol, di ogkohoy-uan din ka mgo otow no igpariralom ka goinawa ran to duma ran.”
Ko ogmoomul ka goinawa ta, ogpakasinogow ka ogkita ki to napali-an su ogkoid-uan tad.
palu
Nig-ongkod ka lukos to awawa rin woy hop-at no anak din.  No kunto-on, no-ul-ulangan ka asawa rin woy ka mgo anak din.
Di kunto-on, ka balanghuy on ka oghimuon no agkud.
Ogkamaanow ku sikaniu.
Kono ogluyud to dangob no otow. Ogpallaguy ro duon su wa dan tokora ka lagong to songo otow.”
kita
Ma-agkap ka bitbiton ku.
Kandan ian no goinawa to ogbulig, di litos ian su duon utang to goinawa ran to mgo Hudiu no nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to Hirusalim. Ian su ligkat kandan, ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, natalaran on to karoyawon no nigligkat to pogtuu ran to Magboboot. Sikan ian to og-awoson to, ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, songo ogbulig to mgo nigtuu no mgo Hudiu to ogkoiluan dan to pog-ugpo dan.
Ka otow no maroyow ka batasan din, songo maroyow ka ogkagion din. Di ka otow no maroot ka batasan din, songo maroot ka ogkagion din.
Ogpakasaad ka sikan no kayu no su-an no ian a-alikoy.
Ka otow no nigpasungguran to babuy waro nigbogoy to ogpatonga ka sikan no bakotin no inanak.
Nokouma on dio si Husi no taga Arimatia ko mahapun lagboy. Maroyow no konsial sikandin dio to Ampuanan dan no songo ogtatagad to Pogsugu to Magboboot kai to tano. To mahapun on to allow to mgo Hudiu to ogpanagana su allow ran to oghimoloy ko ogkapawo, nig-aguanta ni Husi to igkasipod din no nighondio ki Pilatu no nokouwang on no ogbuyu to lawa ni Hisus.
Kagi ni Dabid, “Ka Magboboot nigkagi rio to Lagboy no Igbuyag ku to, ‘Dini ka to kawanan ku ogpinnuu taman to ogdoogon ku ka tibo no mgo usig nu oyow ogpakaluhud on dini to tangkaan nu!’ ”
Ka sikan no dakol no ulod woy ka mgo diwata rin, indogpak kai to tano. No ka sikan no ulod, duon dongan no ian ka igbuyag to mgo busow no oghingaranan ki Satanas woy si Talagbayung. No sikandin ka niggawoy to tibo no mgo koot-otawan kai to soini no kalibutan.
Ogbibigut ka otow to kayu no mallintokon din ka ogsapsap oyow ogparokotan din to puspuru.
Malogot ka soi ogkagion ku kaniu to agad hontow no otow no kono din ogsagmanon ka Magboboot no ogkounawa to pogsagman to soin no mgo bato, kono ogpakaamut ka sika otow to Pogsugu to Magboboot.”
Ko ogpitow ki to pitsa to bulan, awoson no og-indanan ta ka liwak to warò ogpakabalabag oyow ogkatuman to poglibulung.
Nigtilaa kud.
kaglas2
Banbanayan nu naboli ka wasoy su nig-itu-os ka pirisiu din.
bagò
Ian su sikaniu, mgo sulod, nokog-unawa kow to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu no dio to Hudia no nasakup to Magboboot su sikandan, nabaybayaran on to mgo duma ran no Hudiu no waro nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu, no songo ogkabaybayaran kow to kaniu no mgo duma no songo waro mogtuu.
Dio to tangkaan to sikan no pinnuuanan to Lagboy no Igbuyag, duon nigkita ku no ogkounawa to dagat no malayag no noiling to lamita no lagboy no mating-ow. No to marani to sikan no pinnuuanan to Lagboy no Igbuyag, duon hop-at no hinimu no duon goinawa. Dio nigsasindog to songo hop-at no sungguk to ilis. Ka tangkaan woy ka poka to sikan no mgo lawa ran, nigtangkapan to mgo mata.
Pogkataga to mgo dangob no duma rin no suguanon to soini, nigmasakit so goinawa ran woy nanhondio sikandan to sikan no datu. Innangon dan tibo no nighimu to sikan no suguanon to duma rin no suguanon.
lantas
liu
koblit
kitkit
toptop
tongà
Ian su og-awoson to waro ogligkat to mgo ogkakoon ta no ogpakaraat to nighimu to Magboboot. Ogbogayan ki to ogkoon to agad nokoy no ngalap, di ogkohimu on no maroot ko duon duma ta no ogpakasuwoy on to pogtuu rin su ligkat to agad nokoy no ogkakoon ta.
Ko oggulabung no ogmalayat ka pog-allow, ogbagtad on ka tanò no ogpanbotu on.
Tobtobi nu ka ulobang.
No to tibo no oghimuon ta, og-awoson to ian ta igpapitow ta ka dakol no goinawa ta to duma ta.
unuk
Di ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus, waro makasabut ko nokoy ka kalitukan to kagi rin su noholosan do sikandan to kalitukan. Sikan ian to waro dan masabuti ka kalitukan to kagi rin.
Ko ogpalawod ki to gakit no diò ki ogdu-ung to malongon no woig no konò ki ogdu-ung diò to mabolbol su ogka-alus ka gakit ta. Ogka-anlas ogkohutuk ka gakit ko ogdu-ung ki to mabolbol.
abungow
Ka otow no nabulog ka mata rin konad on ogkabolat ka mata rin.
Ko na-anad ka, du-on dayagang nu woy malomu nu su nigtagama nu.
Agad hondoi no boi no ogkitoon dan, duon ogkoiniatan dan to ogpambaloybaloy. No kono ogkabulung ka pogkoibog dan to mgo maroot. No ian dan og-ayaton ka mgo otow no doisok pad ka pogsabut dan ko nokoy ka litos no oghimuon dan. Hanhanon sikandan to kono no litos. Di ogkoumaan sikandan to logpad no ogligkat to Magboboot.
Nig-asawa ka giboon to namatoy ka sikan no balu no songo namatoy no waro anak. Woy ogkounawa ian to sika igkatatolu no patalahari.
Nò, pogdinog to mgo Hudiu to kagi ni Hisus, nigpurut dan ka mgo batu no igdogpak dan porom kandin.
so
Ka batò no ogsusu no konò ogtulab, ogpoko-i-ilob to  gatas.
padpad
indanan
Momonu kid to’g-ungud uran?
bakalow
Kagi pad ni Hisus to, “Konad on ogkalugoy no kona a now ogkitoon. Di songo kono ogkalugoy no ogkitoon a now man do.”
Duon buwa sagboka kaniu no ogkagi kanak to, “Ko sikan ian ka oghimuon to Magboboot, manio to ogkabolu sikandin ko ogpakasalo ki su waro otow no ogpakaligal to pogboot din?”
lampoy
Di tongod to mgo batasan no waro pulus no oghimuon to mgo otow no dio dod to kausiloman, kono tad og-unugon. Di igpapitow ta atag to maroot ian ka sikan no mgo batasan.
salugsug
alipaspas
Ian og-abin to ulu ka nigbaba to babuy.
Di sikantanow atag no nigtuu on, ogpakasolod kid to sikan no intagad din no himolayan. Ka innangon ku, ogpakaayun to kagi to Magboboot no ingkasulat dongan. Kagi rin to, “Nò, su nabolu ad, nigsapaan ku to kono ad on ogbogoy to ogsolod ka sikan no mgo otow to sikan no himolayan ku.” Sikan ian ka kagi rin di ko napongaan din on ka soini no kalibutan, duon on tahan ka sikan no igtagad din no himolayan.
Ka dio a nokani to kaniu, nataga kow to waro a noiniat to salapi now, ko bulawan now woy ko manggad now.
Pogdatong dio to doipag sikandan, duon pananglitan ni Hisus kandan. Kagi ni Hisus to, “Bantoy kow to igpatulin to paan to mgo Parisiu woy mgo Sadusiu.”
Palimunon ku.
naan
Nò, nigsasindog on no nig-awo on si Hisus to anaranan to mgo og-ampu no nighondio to baloy ni Simon no nigsolod on. Di ka anugang ni Simon no boi, nigdaralu woy moinit lagboy ka lawa rin no nangonan dan si Hisus to oyow ogbawian din sikandin.
sasow
Kuntoon mgo sulod, tongod to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus di nammatoy on, ogkoiniatan noy to ogkataga kow to tu-tuu ian tongod kandan oyow ka masakit to goinawa now, kono ogkounawa to mgo otow no waro mogtuu no ungod ogkalango to waro ogkoim-imanan dan ko duon pogkouyag ta.
Ka otow, ogpani-ang to kayu no igtomog din.
balow
lu-ag
Ian to duon alas no ogpakasugat to goinawa ta no ogligkat to kamatayon su ka mgo salo ta. Woy ian to ogkaroog ki to sikan no mgo salo ta su waro ki nigpaagad-agad to Balaod to Magboboot.
sabitan
Di ko duon pa nalop–ang ku no balaod woy ko maroot no hinimuan ku no oglitos to igkamatoy ku, balagad ko oghimatayan a. Dokad di, su ubat do duon ka mgo igbayungbayung dan kanak, kono no litos no ogpalibongan a nu dio to kandan. Sikan ian to ogsalig ad on ki Igbuyag Sisar no Labow no Igbuyag ta dio to Ruma to oyow sikandin on ka ogboboot kanak,” kagi ni Pablo.
No ka gimukud to datu, dio makarolog to Hadis. Nabaybayaran on ian ka sika datu no poglonghag din, nigkita rin ka gimukud ni Abraham no dio to mariu, woy duon do ian nigpinnuu ka gimukud ni Lasaru to longod din.”
Ko mahapun on no magaan on ogkatangkob on, nanduma to mgo otow ka tibo no duma ran no nandaralu woy ka pigbusawan.
Nasuang on ka lugung.
manikan
Soin no kagi ni Hisus, ka igpatokod din to mgo otow to moomonu ka igkamatoy rin.
busow
Itingangag ka boi.
tinggow
Nò, kuntoon, sikanta no nasagboka on ki Hisu Kristu, kono kid on ogkabootan to logpad no ogligkat to Magboboot.
sigsig
Koddi no Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan, ogkamatoy a no ogkounawa to kagi to tahan no impasulat to Magboboot. Di ogkohoy-u man ka sikan no otow no ogpanabod koddi. Madmaroyow pad porom ko waro mootow ka sikan no otow.”
dayun
Pogloko to Nati no Karniru to igkapapitu no imparokot to sikan no ogbasoon, waro nigkakagi dio to langit taman to tonga to uras.
Ko ogkagi pad ka songo talagnangon, di duon on isabuk to Magboboot to goinawa to dangob, magaan do ogpakahagtong ka nokohun-a oyow ogpakakagi on ka duma rin.
balutu
Ogbuligan ta ka otow no malotoy to ogkitkit oyow ogpaka-anad to oghihipanow oyow ogpoko-orol on.
Ko ogmalunoy on, konò ogkaligtù.
abod
su agad hontow ka ogbuyu to Magboboot, ian ka otow no ogkabogayan, no ka otow no ogparagas ogpamangho, sikan ian ka otow no ogpakakita to ogpammitawon din, no ka otow no ogpangumow, sikan ka otow no ogpulasan to Magboboot.”
“Ko ogpakasalo koykow ka sagboka no sulod nu no songo nigtuu, hondio-i nu sikandin woy inangon nu kandin ko nokoy ka salo din dio to koykow. Di awoson no woy nud ognangonan ko sagboka ro sikandin dio. Ko ogsugut sikandin no ogpokoghusoy kow, ogpokouli ka maroyow no goinawa now.
No nignangonan a to diwata to Magboboot to kagi rin to, “Isulat nu ka soini to: Ogkarago ka mgo otow no nig-akat to pogtambung to pagkoonan to pogpangasawa to sikan no ogkohingaranan to Nati no Karniru.” No kagi rin kanak to, “Malogot to nigligkat to Magboboot ka sikan no kagi.”
Ko ogkapanoy ogkatapid ka batò diò to diralom to gotok, oglomuan ka inoy ko og-anak.
togo-od
hasa-an
sawig
ligis
Songo nig-insaan ni Hisus sikandan no nigkagi to, “Agad sikaniu, ogpaagad-agad kow to mgo in-anad no ingalat kanta to mgo kaap-apuan ta dongan di oglop-ang kow to mgo sugu to Magboboot. Manio naan?”
Sikan ian, tongod to mgo lukos no ogtuu no dio to agad hondoi no ugpaan, ogkoiniatan ku to og-ampu sikandan. Di woy og-ampu, og-awoson to maawang ka goinawa ran to Magboboot woy og-awoson dod to waro igkabolu dan woy songo waro igpaap-apuloy ran to agad hontow.
hublut
tawawa
Ko og-ilud, songo pog-onsig.
songut
Di ko waro igduwaruwa to lukos to ogpakaponod to ogkoiniatan din poron woy waro ogpakapogos kandan to ogpangasawa, woy ko sikan ian ka maroyow to goinawa rin, litos ko kono din do og-asawoon ka boi. Maroyow ka pogboot din.
puruk
Ko ogkulasan ta, og-anamon ta ko du-on otow -- sikan ka ogpansobon to du-on mangayow no oggogopù, ogkagi ki to "rrrrr".
orol
No ungod ki ogbulig to mgo duma ta no nigtuu ki Hisus ko duon og-awoson dan. Ko duon otow no ogdatong poron to baloy ta, ogpapanoikon ta woy ogsagmanon ta.
bongkag
Ka Magboboot no ian dod Magboboot to mgo pinanganak ni Israil, ian ka nig–alam woy nigbulig to kaap–apuan ta no dio pad nan–ugpo to Ehipto taman to nigmohon–ing woy nigmanokal sikandan. Pogkalugoy, pigpaawo to Magboboot sikandan to Ehipto su mabogbog ka impangabang din kandan.
Ian su nataga kad on tahan to tibo no mgo batasan noy to Hudiu, woy ka mgo igkasasow noy woy ka mgo igmaap–apuloy noy. No sikan ian to ogbuyu a koykow to oyow ogpamminog ka pad kanak.”
Nigkagi ni Hisus to pananglitan din. “Duon dod dangob no mgo karniru ku no waro pad makasolod to soin no alad. Og-angayon ku pad sikandan no ogpamminogon dan to kagi ku. Nò, ko naangoy on, sagboka ro sikandan no puntuk woy sagboka ro ka talagbantoy kandan tibo.
ligà
Tuui now ro to sikoddi, duon a to Amoy ku woy ka Amoy ku, songo duon kai to koddi. Ko kono kow ogtuu to soini, tuu kow on ian koddi tongod to mgo koin-inuan no pighimu ku.
tunud
Woy ko duon oghiupon oyow ogpakapanagana poron ka mgo sundalu, di ko kono ogkalituk, waro ogpakasagman no ogsasindog ko duon poron ogkatangko dan.
Oghagtong on no ogko-on.
nikaniu
giba
Nigtilow ku ka balaod.
Duon allow no nokohondio si Hisus to songo lunsud no duon otow no ibungon no mohon-ing no kogang dio to lawa rin. To nigkita rin si Hisus niglangkob dio to tangkaan din no nigpohoy-uhoy-u kandin no kagi rin to, “Buyag, ko ogkoiniatan nu, ogpakabawi ka to kogang ku oyow ogkaawo ka igkaligsomi ku dio to tangkaan to mgo otow.”
to-tò
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Ko duon talinga now, pamminog kow.”
palatok
salinongan
Nò, mohon-ing so mgo sumansuman dan tongod ki Hisus.
Di agad hontow no oghimu to maroyow, agad ka mgo Hudiu di songo iglagkos ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, ogbogayan sikandan to karoyawon no ogligkat to Magboboot. Ogsayoon din sikandan woy ogbogayan din to maawang no goinawa ran.
buyag
simba
Ka so-ini no alang to taloy-u, igtubad to mgo busow.
indakolon
ligsom
pindit
Ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus, nigtuman dan ka kagi rin no nigpapinnuu ran on ka mohon-ing no mgo otow.
Lagkos to sikan, duon dod ka igkasasow ku tongod to tibo no mgo nigtuu no dio to agad hondoi no mgo lunsud.
Ko du-on on sagboka no anak noy no boi, igkaras noy pad ka batò diò to amoy noy woy to inoy noy.
dompo-dompo
wangal
Dongan, to nigkagi ka Magboboot, nalubo ka kalibutan. Di kuntoon, nignangon sikandin to, “Oghutukon ku ogluboon uromo ka kalibutan, di kono do no ka kalibutan ka ogluboon ku ko kono ogpakalagkos on ka langit.”
Pogkaponga to pog–insoinso dan kanak, igpalibuwas a ran porom su waro salo ku no oglitos to oghimatayan a.
agad nokoy
bitil
Ko ogko-on ki to du-on bokog no du-on pad sapù, og-anguson ta to og-il-il.
unung
woy nignangon to, “Soini no otow nignangon to, ‘Oggulakon ku ka soin no Dakol no Ampuanan to Magboboot, woy to igkatatolu no allow, igpohutuk ku ro no ogpasasindogon.’ ”
Nighondini a to soin no kalibutan oyow koddi ka igbat-ow to doromdom now oyow sikan no otow no nigtuu koddi, kono din layun og-ugpo to marusilom.”
lu-lù
ting-ow
"Pila na-an no gatus ka kuddò nu?" Kagi, "Lalimma no gatus."
Du-on batok no og-ayun to lawa woy du-on batok no ogbalabag to lawa.
Di agad naan, sikanta no nigtuu on to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, ogmabulbuligoy ki ka mgo lukos, woy ka mgo boi.
pugu-ay
Waro og-iskuila no labow to maistru rin. Di ka og-iskuila no ogpaanad, ko ogkapongaan din on ka og-anaran din to tibo no natagaan to maistru rin, ogpokounawa sikandin to maistru rin.”
“Wa do malugoy no duon Libita no songo nakabayo poron to sikan no napalian di to nigkita rin, songo niglipasan din do. Dio to limang to dalan nigbayo.
ka-ku-kow
Nò, nataga kinow to, ka kagi to Balaod to Magboboot, impanangon din to mgo otow no nasakup to sikan no Balaod. Di ian tuud din to oyow waro otow no ogpakakagi to kono no litos ko ogkalogparan sikandin to Magboboot. Ian su tibo no mgo otow kai to kalibutan, nakalop-ang to sikan no innangon to Magboboot.
Ko ogpamurut ki to bogas to maoganì no nakatkat, songo tabang dod su ogpamuruton ta.
bayokbok
Kono now ogkalingawi to ogsagman to mgo magaliug no ogpokouma dio to ugpaan now su duon mgo otow no nakasagman to magaliug no waro matagoi di diwata naan to Magboboot ka nigsagman dan.
salimboy
Ian su duon ignangon ku kaniu no malasi ku ingkanangon nokani, no ogpakasinogow a ko oghutuk a man do no ognangon kaniu to mohon-ing ka mgo otow no ligkat to mgo batasan dan, ogtokoron ta to usig sikandan to nangnangonon to pogkamatoy ni Kristu dio to krus.
Nataban ka pusil
logon
nasì
Ka manggad no nigsabukan to gawgaw, nigkosog on ka nagangow on.
hokad
kosog
Du-on otow no ogpa-init to paan no ogkuò to mani no ogpoidpoiran din oyow ogmo-omis.
Gaba-an ki to homoy.
Bali naan, nokouma koy dio to malintok no pulu to Kauda. No su dio koy makabayo to limang din no ogkaalindungan, naayunan noy to ig–untud to barku ka balutu no naganuy. Di nohirapan koy su dakol ka kalamag.
su koddi ka ogbogoy kaniu ko nokoy ka ogkagion now woy ka ogkatouan now to maroyow no igtabak now su oyow, agad hontow ka usig now, waro litos no igtabak dan to ogkagion now woy kono ogpakaligal sikandan to igtabak now.
Di si Hisus atag, wa din pad mogsalig to sikan no mgo otow su natagaan din on ka batasan to tibo no mgo otow.
Di si Milkisidik atag, agad to kono ogkoiling kandan su kono no pinanganak ni Libi, di nabogayan dod ni Abraham si Milkisidik to sikan no ka igkasampulu no baad to naagow ran. Woy agad to si Abraham ka ogkabogayan uromo to sikan no insabut to Magboboot, di nig-ampuan dod ni Milkisidik si Abraham oyow ogkohoy-uan to Magboboot.
oyow ogkohimu ki no matuwarong dio to tangkaan din, woy ogtuman ki to tibo no igsugu din kanta tag sagboka.”
tagpì
Mamalomu pad ian to sika dakol no ayam no kamil to ogsorop to lobut to dagom to datu no mgo otow ko ogpasakup to Pogsugu to Magboboot.”
hapow to lanut
Ian su nig-iman-iman a to pogkouyag no ogligkat to pogtuman ku poron to sikan no Balaod. Dokad di to nagawayan a su naalap ad to tahan no koiniatan ku to maroot, no niglop-angan ku ka sikan no Balaod. No ka ogkoumaan ku poron to sikan, ogkamatoy a to waro katamanan.
Oghimuon ku sikoykow no igbuyag ko ogkatuman on ka Pogsugu to Magboboot to mgo otow kai to tano. Ka igsapad nu kai to kalibutan, songo igsapad to Magboboot dio to langit. Ka igtugut nu kai to kalibutan, songo igtugut to Magboboot dio to langit.”
soping
tarayya
ulas
Madmaroyow pad ko imbaligya din soini no mohomut oyow ogkabogayan poron ka mgo publi to salapi.”
No nigtabak ka otow to, ‘Duon utang ku no songo gatus no lata no lana.’ No kagi to sikan no sinaligan to, ‘Puruta nu ka soini no listaan to tahan no utang nu no agpas nu isulat to kalimmaan ka utang nu.’ ”
Bahin to soini duon bantaan to mgo igbuyag to mgo Hudiu to goinawa ran to ogkamatoy si Hisus su kono ogpaagad-agad to Balaod dan to Allow ran to Oghimoloy. Kono no sikan do ka igbayung dan kandin; duon dod ka pignangon din to Amoy rin ka Magboboot; pigpagsokod sikandin to Magboboot su nig-iling no Amoy rin ka Magboboot.
su mohon-ing ka mgo otow no ognangon to, ‘Koddi ian ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan.’ Sikan ian no mohon-ing ka oggawayan.
lamud
Pogkouma ran dio to lunsud to Sisaria, imbogoy ran on ka sulat ligkat to igbuyag to mgo sundalu woy songo imbogoy ran on si Pablo dio to gobirnador.
logod
tuba
bungabungan
Nò, kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Pigbalagad now ka sugu to Magboboot woy ian now ogtumanon ka mgo ig-anad to mgo otow ro kai to kalibutan.”
Ko daral dò, lo-in on no lituk su ogdagusuon ta ka duma ta.
Ko duon salo din koykow, woy ko duon mgo utang din, ian a nu sukuti.
Tingkob to Kabungabungan.
sungit
Kagi pad ni Hisus, “Malogot ian to nigligkat ad dio to Amoy ku no Magboboot no nighondini to soin no kalibutan. No, kuntoon, og-uli ad dio to Amoy ku.”
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, pitawa now ka duma now woy alam kow to papitu no otow no natagaan now to maroyow ka batasan dan, woy to namootan on sikandan to Gimukud to Magboboot, woy to duon katouan dan to ogpanalad.
alap-ap
Ogkapulusan pad sikandan no ogpoomot no ogtuman to mgo sugu to Magboboot su ogbuligan to Magboboot sikandan oyow ogkohimu rin to soini.
Oggoramon ta ka pa-a.
aloy
talam
Di kuntoon, su magainallow ro man ka goinawa now kanak, ig-ommug ku sikaniu.
timbabow
Nò, duon ingkabolu ni Hirodis to taga Tiro woy taga Sidon. No su ka ogkakoon dan, ogligkat to kandin no ugpaan, niglimudlimud on sikandan no pig–amigu ran ka sinaligan ni Hirodis no si Blastu oyow ogpohusayon din si Hirodis ko nokoy ka igkabolu din kandan.
Nigparagas no nigkagi si Huan to, “Woig ka igbautismu ku kaniu, indanan no pig-ongkoran now on ka mgo maroot no mgo batasan now. Di ka ogpakasundul koddi, ogbautismuan kow ian nikandin to Gimukud to Magboboot woy hapuy. Sikan no ogsundul koddi, dakoldakol pad koddi ka katondanan din. Doidoisok ka katondanan ku agad to oghokad to kandin no sandal.
bolbol
songsong
Nakaponga sikandan nigtoon to mgo sigay, mohon-ing lagboy no ngalap ka nigsagad to sigay ran no ogkagisi on poron ka mgo sigay.
Ko nakarinog woy si Hisus to soin no nangnangonon, nig-ongkod sikandan dio to Hudia no niglibong dio to Galilia.
Ogkoiniatan ku, mgo sulod, to oyow ogkataga kow to malasi a poron ogbabantaan no oghondio to kaniu. Di taman kuntoon, duon nakabalabag kanak. Ian to ogkoiniat a no oghondio to kaniu su oyow, ligkat to pog-anad ku, duon mgo otow dio to kaniu no songo ogtuu ki Hisus no unawa to duon mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no songo nigtuu kandin no dio to duma no mgo lunsud.
Ka duma, konad ogpusù
Litos sikan su agad ko ogkabui ki pad kai to tano woy ko ogkamatoy ki, ka Magboboot ka tagtuun to tibo kanta,
No to tibo no katouanan ta, og-ol-olog ki to oyow ko ogkohimu, waro samuk di ogmaroyow ka pogdumaruma ta to tibo no otow.
koddol
Sikan ian no kinahanglan no layun kow porom ogpanagana, su koddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan, oglibong a to allow no waro now tatagari.”
Marolag no ogpalupù to bolaron do.
tangon
Sikan ian,” kagi ni Hisus, “ko ogbunsud pad ogkatuman ka innangon ku kaniu, sasindog kow woy longhag kow on su magaan on ka kalipuasan now.”
Kagi to mgo suguanon to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta kandin to, “Timuli nu ka pogtuu noy.”
tugu
tongod to sikandin no ian Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan, og-awos to ogbobootan dio to mgo makasasalo, woy innangon din kaniu to igpalansang to krus no ka igkatatolu no allow ligkat to pogkamatoy rin, ogkootawan on.”
lanis
Sikanak no si Pablo, daruwa koy ki Timoteo no sulod ta ki Hisu Kristu, ogpangumusta koy kaniu. Sikanak, nohimu a no suguanon ni Hisu Kristu su pogboot to Magboboot.
I'll work by the day for Aunt Domingga so that I can earn [some] money
pinota
Ka Magboboot, konon Magboboot to mgo nammatoy. Sikandin ka Magboboot to mgo nabuhi, su tibo no mgo nigtuu kandin, agad ka nighun-a mamatoy, ogkabuhi dod dio to tangkaan din,” kagi ni Hisus.
ilud
Nokani no waro kow pad nigtuu, songo sikan dod ka kaniu no mgo batasan no ungod kow oghimu to sikan ian no maroot no mgo batasan.
uranda
Nokouma on dio to Kapirnaum no ko niglopow on to baloy, nig-insaan ni Hisus sikandan ko nokoy ka nigpaap-apoloy ran ko rio pad to dalan.
Ayad-ayad kow su ka sikan no ubat no ingkaanad kaniu, ian ogkounawaan ka igpatulin no ig-amut ta to harina su agad malintok do ka ig-amut ta di ogkatangkapan on ka tibo.
tangkulu
Ka amoy ni Eliakim, si Milia. Ka amoy ni Milia, si Mina. Ka amoy ni Mina, si Matata. Ka amoy ni Matata, si Natan. Ka amoy ni Natan, si Dabid.
tabok
Uromò a og-ulì, ko darua no tu-id.
Di ognangonan ku sikaniu tongod to otow no ogpanabod koddi no duon kai nig-amut kanta to lamisaan no nigtugon koddi.
osyndalapan
Ko du-on ka oghipanow, ogdalapanan ki ka ogdagusuon ki su ogligkat on sikandan.
iut
lokitok
Ko ogkolkol, ogbunsud no ogkolkolonon.
Pakasugkip to mata noy
Nig-inso ni Nikodimu ki Hisus. Kagi rin, “Ogkoomonu to ogpakatood to soin no innangon nu?”
Songo marusilom to nohirogo ka mgo otow, nokouma ka usig to sika otow no nigsawod to hilamunon dio to kamot no nigsawaran to maroyow no mgo boni no tirigu. Pogkaponga rin to pogsawod to maroot no mgo boni, nig-uli on sikandin.
No sikandin, woy ka woig no imbautismu ki Hisus, woy ka langosa to pogkamatoy rin, tibo sikan no tatolu, ogpamalogot kanta to tu-tuu ian to si Hisus ka Anak to Magboboot.
Kagi to songo otow, "Hondo-i ka nig-alawat to sikan no boni?" Kagi ku, "Dio to Maguimon. Ogbuyu sikandan to sikan no boni no songo ogbunanaton dan."
onow
Mgo sulod no indakoli to goinawa to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, og-awoson to ungod noy ogsayoon ka Magboboot tongod kaniu, su ligkat to an-anayan, nig-abin kow rin no sakup din oyow ogkapangabangan kow rin to mgo salo now su nigtuu kow on to tu-tuu ian no tinuuan woy su ligkat to Gimukud din, nig-awo din on ka maroot no dio to goinawa now.
Kagi ni Hisus to mgo hibatoon din, “Ko og-ampu kow, kagi now to, ‘Amoy noy no dio to Langit, ka ig-ampu noy oyow ogtahuron ka ngaran nu to tibo no mgo otow. Ogkoiniatan noy no ogmagaan ogkatuman ka Pogsugu nu kai to soini no kalibutan.
budbud
Nohimu rin pad soini su wa pad man napirisu si Huan.
tapid
bouk
lamping
Mgo anak, tantanuri now ka goinawa now oyow kono kow oghilabot to mgo og-ampuan to mgo otow no kono ian no tu-tuu ian no Magboboot.
To sikan no lalimma no bulan, ogkoiniat ka mgo otow no ogkamatoy on porom, di kono ogpakatood no ogkamatoy su ogpamariu man kandan ka kamatayon.
tibuias
dogpak
timbabakal
Pananglitan, ko ian pa ogkabogayan to sikan no innangon to Magboboot ka otow no ogtuman poron to Balaod, waro poron pulus to pogtuu ta to Magboboot woy kono poron ogkatuman ka sikan no innangon din.
Nò, ko sikan ka ogkoumaan to mgo otow no waro nigpaagad-agad to Balaod ni Moisis, ogkoomonu on buwa ka sikan no otow no og-iniug to Anak to Magboboot? Dakoldakol lagboy ka kandin no iglogpad su dio to goinawa rin, nigdoisokan din ka pulus to langosa ni Hisus. Di ka sikan no langosa ka ig-ayun poron to goinawa to sikan no otow dio to Magboboot, woy sikan dod ka igpatokod to sikan no iam no sabut to duon on dalan ta dio to Magboboot. No ka sikan, songo ogkounawa to niglomotan din ka Gimukud to Magboboot no ogkohoy-u kanta.
Nò, nig-awo on si Pedro to sikan no lama no nakasinogow on to mapoitpoit on ian ka sinogawan din.
Ka mgo bituon, nonoulug kai to tano. No ian ogkounawaan ka moilow no bogas to kayu no oghingaranan to igira no ogkapadpad to dakol no kalamag.
Ogsalapid on ka oghipanow ka paa rin.
No sikan ian ka ignangon ku kaniu: ka pogtuu ta, ogligkat to nakarinog kinow to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu.
tuloy
Sikan ka gimukud to mgo otow dongan no waro mogpamminog to kinagian to Magboboot ko nighimu si Noi to dakol no barku no oghingaranan to arka. Nig-aguanta to Magboboot ka maroot no batasan to mgo otow tagood to napongaan ni Noi ka poghimu rin to sikan no arka. Wawalu ro no otow ka nigsolod to arka no napangabangan on ligkat to woig no nig-ugub.
Ogkatou kow to og-anad to dangob no otow. Manio to kono kow songo ogkatou no og-anad to kaniu no goinawa? Ogkagi kow ko og-anad kow to, “Kono kow ogpanakow.” Dokad di, songo ogpanakow kow.
buslut
Ka miow natilalam su nigpamokan to ogko-on to salmon.
ayu-ayu
antagbot
bo-ot
Nò, to napurut dan on ka salapi dan, nigsamilian dan ka salapi no imbogoy to nigpatalabau kandan no kagi ran,
Ka otow no ogkundabon, ogliason sikandin ogpokohipanow rò du-on to agad hondoi ogdolog sikandin.
bangan
Konò ogkatibug no ogtoi-on ta.
Magaan nigsolod si Saulo dio to anaranan to mgo Hudiu no dio to Damasku. Woy nignangonnangon din on tongod ki Hisus. Kagi rin, “Si Hisus, ian ka Anak to Magboboot.”
Nò, nighutuk nigkagi si Hisus kandan to, “Nokoy ka pogdoromdom now to soini? Duon otow no darua ka anak din no lukos. Nò, nignangonan din ka kakoy to, ‘Asat, hondio ka pa to pinamulaan tanow to ubas woy talabau ka pa dio to soini no allow.’
Di duon dod pila no kono ku ogkoiniatan no oghimuon now. Ian su duon mgo duma now no og-unugon ka sikan no in-anad ni Balaam dongan. Ian su duon dalan no in-anad ni Balaam ki Balak to oyow ogpasaloon din ka mgo pinanganak ni Israil. No nigpaayat ni Balaam ka mgo otow to oyow ogkokoon sikandan to ngalap no igkatubad to mgo inotow woy to oyow oghimuon dan ka mgo maroot to kono no asawa ran.
Nataga ki, tongod to Anak to Magboboot, to nighondii to soini no tano no nigbogayan ki nikandin to pogsabut oyow ogkatagaan ta ko hondoi ka tu-tuu ian no Magboboot. Sikanta no nigtuu, ogdumaruma ki kandin no ian ka tu-tuu no Magboboot woy songo ogdurumaruma ki to Anak din no si Hisu Kristu. Sikandin ian ka tu-tuu ian no Magboboot, woy sikandin dod ian ka ogpakabogoy to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
Ko du-on igkasasow to songo otow no ogkabuligan so goinawa rin, ogma-agkap so bukod din.
kapok
Nigkagi si Hisus kandan to, “Malogot soini no ignangon ku kaniu. Koddi no ian Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to tano, dakol ka katondanan ku uromo to ogsugu to mgo otow ko duon on uromo ka iam no kalibutan. Sikaniu no mgo hibatoon ku songo duon katondanan now uromo no ogsugu to tibo no mgo pinanganak to sika sampulu woy darua no mgo anak ni Israil dongan.
bakiag
Ogbanggal to batu.
Di ko duon otow no kono ogpaagad-agad to innangon noy to soini no sulat, indani now no kono kow ogdumaruma kandin oyow ogmasakit so goinawa rin to batasan din.
Ko tibò du-on masakit to goinawa, sikan ka og-awoson nu to ogpo-ul-uli-oy to goinawa now.  Pinogkopkop kow on su su nokog-ulì on ka goinawa now.
Ko moon-ing on ka alibutod no ogna-asna-as, ogpatokod to nokoghulanghulang on to galung no pula.
Ka nasalapi to bulu rin, no-ubus to otow no nigsaligan din.
Ian su oyow oglitos on ian ka tibo no katouanan woy to oyow duon on ka duma no og-awoson to mgo suguanon to Magboboot oyow ogpakatuman sikandan to tibo no maroyow no igpohimu kandan.
korid
Nò, su marani ro ka lunsud to Hupi to lunsud to Lida, nignanangonan on ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to Hupi to dio si Pedro to Lida. Sikan ian to pigsugu dan ka daruwa no lukos dio ki Pedro no nigbuyu dan kandin to, “Agpas ka no ogduma kanami dio to Hupi.”
Warò ogtamong to anak din no konò ogpakapangali.
Sikan ian, soini ka goinawa ku. Ko duon sulod ku to pogtuu no ogpakasalo on su ligkat to ogkitoon a rin to ogkoon a to ingkatubad to inotow-otow, kono ad on oghutuk no ogkoon to sikan su oyow kono a ogpakapasalo to duma ku no nigtuu.
sobu
Woy songo og-awoson to ogmaawang doka goinawa ta ligkat to waro salo ta. Ian su oyow ko duon otow no ogdoot to maroyow no batasan ta no og-unug to batasan ni Kristu, ogkasipod sikandin to innangon din su maroyow atag ka hinimuan ta.
Kagi to inoy rin kuwo to mgo suguonon, “Tumana now ka agad nokoy no igsugu din,” kagi to inoy rin.
ligtulas
To pogdinog ni Maria, nigsasindog sikandin woy niglibuwas no nig-agpas oyow ogtagbu ki Hisus.
Duon ka sagboka no lukos no og-ugpo dio to lunsud to Bitania no si Lasaru ka ngaran din no nigdaralu sikandin. Matatalahari si Lasaru ki Maria woy si Marta no mgo ataboy rin no tibo nig-ugpo dio to Bitania.
Nigtabak si Pilatu to, “Ka inpasulat kud, kono ku ogbalbalawan.”
landig
No sikanami woy si Pablo, nighipanow koy on no nokouma koy on dio to lunsud to Pilipus. Woy nig–amut koy pad to Pagkoonan to Harina no waro Ig–amut to Igpatulin. Pogkaponga to sikan, nigsakoy koy to barku ligkat to Pilipus no nigsundul koy dio to lunsud to Troas. Lalimma no allow noy woy koy nigdatong dio to Troas no nakaamut koy on to duma noy. No papitu no allow ka ig–ugpo noy dio to Troas.
To ogkakagi pad si Hisus no nokouma ka sagboka no Hudiu no duon katondanan din dio to anaranan to mgo og-ampu. Nigluhud sikandin dio to tangkaan ni Hisus no nigpohoy-uhoy-u no nigkagi to, “Ka boi no anak ku namatoy ganna, di ko oghondian nu woy ogsamsamon nu sikandin, ogkootawan sikandin.”
Tu-tuu ian ka soini no innangon ku kaniu. No ogkoiniatan ku no igbaghot nu ka sikan woy ig-anad nu to oyow ka mgo otow no nigtuu to Magboboot, ian dan ogtuuron ka ogpanhimu to maroyow. Maroyow ka soini no ingkaanad ku kaniu, woy ian ka duon pulus to mgo otow.
tuali
dulis
Ogkounawa ian to nigpasulat to Magboboot dio to Tahan no Kasulatan nokani. Kagi, “Sika otow no nigtuu koddi, duon dio to goinawa rin no ogkounawa to og-ugwak no bougan no oglibuwas no ian ka ogbogoy to kouyagan to mgo duma rin ko ogkoibog to og-inum.”
tol-ob
sigkon
Woy kai to kandin, konad on ogdinogon ka mgo daging to alpa woy ka mgo maroyow no oggung, woy ka daging to pulondag woy ka bungag. Songo konad on ogkakitaan ka mgo otow no ogkatou to agad nokoy no ogpanhimuon. Songo konad on ogdinogon ka daging to mgo galingan.
Ka patiukan, tamo-ing tamusan, woy ka tabu-uan, lapinid, baga-baga, tibo du-on mgo burun. Sikan ka mgo anak dan.
buslut
gulibid
kinabòn
Waro mokouubat sikandan no waro solug no maroot no batasan dan.
amonggoy
omis
Pogkaponga, nigdani kanak ka sagboka to sikan no papitu no diwata to Magboboot no niggongon to sikan no papitu no mgo boung no nataguan on to sikan no papitu no mohuri no igkabaybayari. Kagi rin to, “Hondini kad su igpapitow ku koykow ka ogkohimu no asawa to sikan no ogkohingaranan to Nati no Karniru.”
Sikan ian ka kagi ku su nigsugu si Moisis to, ‘Tahura now ka amoy now mgo inoy now.’ Woy nigsugu dod to, ‘Sikan no otow no ogmarooton din ka amoy rin woy ko inoy rin to kagi rin, og-awoson to ogpohimatayan ka sikan no otow.’
Nokoglongod ka kamot di du-on olatan.
Ka lagtang no bunal, ka bogas din, iglagtang to banak.
bolobog
pangkok
Ian su ka Gimukud to Magboboot ka innangon to Magboboot no igbogoy rin kanta lagkos to innangon din to songo igbogoy rin dio to mgo pinanganak ta. Woy kono no sikan do ka ogkabogayan to Gimukud to Magboboot di agad ka mgo otow no mariu kanta, agad hontow no otawa no oghimuon to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no ka Magboboot no sakup din, songo ogkabogayan to Gimukud din.”
Sikan ian no waro masipod si Apulus no ogbunsud on no ognangonnangon dio to anaranan to mgo Hudiu. Pogdinog ni Akila woy si Prisila to innangonnangon ni Apulus, pighinggat dan sikandin dio to baloy ran no nig–ay–ayaran dan innangonnangon kandin ka waro din pad amana masabuti tongod to sikan no Dalan no nighimu to Magboboot.
Nigkagi man do si Hisus to, “Ka Pogsugu to Magboboot ogkounawa to soini. Duon ka mgo talagngangalap no oggamiton dan ka sigay dio to lanow no nokoutol to mohon-ing so kalasi no mgo ngalap.
Nò, nigbunsud ka mgo igbuyag to Hudiu no ogmarooton dan si Hisus su waro nigpaagad-agad to Balaod to mgo Hudiu to nigbawian din ka otow no nigdaralu to Allow ran to Oghimoloy.
Di waro masabuti to mgo hibatoon din ko nokoy ka kalitukan to sikan no kagi ni Hisus su nokoholos ka kalitukan to soini oyow kono dan pad ogpakasabut. Ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus, og-inso poron kandin ko nokoy ka kalitukan di nahallok no og-inso.
Waro malugoy no nigpanagana on si Maria woy nig-agpas sikandin no oghondio to songo lunsud no dio to songo bubungan duon to Probinsia to Hudia.
kiratkirat
No ko duon darua no boi no ogbibinayu, sagboka ka ogbatunon to Magboboot di ogkagalat do ka dangob,” kagi ni Hisus.
Sikan ian no nigpanduma rin ka mgo sundalu woy ka mgo kapitan dan, no nig–agpas on sikandan nighondio to sikan no nalimud no mgo otow. Pogpitow to mgo otow to sikan on ka igbuyag to mgo sundalu woy ka mgo sundalu no nanduma, nighagtongan dan on to ogpanlampos ki Pablo.
bungkal
Di ka mgo Hudiu no ian mgo pinanganak ni Israil, nahan dan no ogkohimu on sikandan no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot su ogsalig to pogtuman dan poron to Balaod din, di waro makatood.
Ogkaawo doka tibo no nighimu nud, di sikoykow, waro katamanan nu. Tibo no nighimu nud, ogkabuyag on no ogkounawa to manggad no ogkamolu do.
siku-an
Imbogoy ku ki Asat.
Ka otow no lagboy ogginganga ka ogngisi su naragò lagboy sikandin, ungod ogpakangisak.
“Ko ogkoiniat kow no ogkohimu no hibatoon ku, ian now ro poron og-unawaan ka otow no ogkoiniat oghimu to dakol no baloy, no woy pad ogbunsud no oghimu ko ogpinnuu pad no ogsoolon din pad ko duon litos no kalaglagan woy salapi to oyow ogpakaponga sikandin no oghimu.
Ian su sikanak woy si Apulus, ogpabulbuligoy koy to igpohimu to Magboboot kanami. No sikaniu, ka ogkounawa to kamot din. No songo ogkounawa kow rod to Baloy to Magboboot no igpohimu rin.
Nakitaan ni Hisus to soin no lukos no natagaan din to nalugoy on nighibathibat no nigtatagad no nigkagian ni Hisus sikandin. Nig-inso din, “Usi, ogkoiniat ka ko ogkoulian ka?”
Dokad di ko waro dan kitaa ka ogbayaan dan tongod to mohon-ing no nalibulung no mgo otow, sikan ian no namanoik sikandan to kalatkat dio to atop to baloy Nò, nigloko dan ka pila ro no tisa to atop no nigtuntun dan on ka otow no nighibat dut hibatanan din no dio do makasabuk to sika lukos to taliwaro to mgo otow no duon to tangkaan ni Hisus.
Ka kuddò no nabalangitan, ogkabala-an to mgo ulod-ulod no songo ogmabulut.
Tabod now ka bali-og.
Pogdinog ni Hisus to inso dan, nigtabak din to pananglitan. Kagi rin, “Ka mgo otow no waro dalu ran, kono dan og-awoson ka talagtambal; ka mgo otow no duon dalu ran sikandan ian ka og-awos to talagtambal. Wara a nighondini to kalibutan to ogbulig to mgo otow no matuwarong so batasan dan ko kono ian ku ogbuligan ka mgo makasasalo oyow ogbalbalawan dan ka batasan dan.”
Sikan ian, kono no ka ogpamula woy ka ogpambus-ug to pinamula ka ogsayoon. Di ian ta ogsayoon ka Magboboot no ogpatulin to impamula.
Bali ku tilawa ka bogyas ku no naponù to po-it ka nigsagad to bogyas.
Bolodbolori nu to ogbanggut.
“Waro malugoy no nig-uli ka suguanon no kagi rin to igbuyag din to, ‘Natuman on ka insugu nu koddi di duon pad litos oyow ogkaponu ka baloy nu.’
bukakang
Duon allow no nig-ampu si Hisus dio to songo ugpaan no pogkaponga rin, kagi to sagboka no hibatoon din kandin to, “Buyag, anara koy pa oyow ogkatou koy to og-ampu dio to Magboboot su songo nig-anad ni Huan ka kandin no hibatoon.”
libu
Igsondad ki to bayadbayad
indos
lobang
bano-ulì
di ka igbohog ku kaniu, ian do litos no ogkahallokan now ka Magboboot su duon kabogbogan din to oghimatoy woy duon kabogbogan din to ogdogpak dio to imperno. Sikan ian to ignangon ku kaniu to ian now ro kahalloki sikandin.”
dungkù
Kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Agad hondoi no otow no ogtinawoon din ka soin no bato su ka goinawa rin koddi, songo ogtinawo ian koddi. No ko hontow ka ogtinawo koddi, songo ogtinawoon din pad ka Magboboot no nigsugu koddi,” kagi ni Hisus. “No ka duma now no kono ogpalabow so ngaran din dio to tangkaan now, sikan ian ka labow so ngaran dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.”
umalag
gabi-i
Doromdoma now ko nokoy ka maroyow ko oglimudlimud kow, ko litos no batasan to mgo boi no waro igtorong to ulu ran ko og-ampuan dan ka Magboboot?
Ampui a now to oyow ogkapangabangan a rin to oyow waro maroot no ogkohimu kanak no ogligkat to mgo otow no kono ogtuu no dio to ugpaan to Hudia. Woy ampui a rod to oyow ka mgo otow no nasakup to Magboboot no dio to Hirusalim, ogkarago to sikan no igkaalap ku kandan.
Di nataga ki to mangkuwan, ogkoiniatan poron ni Isau to oggalatan to karoyawon no ogligkat to amoy rin. Dokad di to niglop-angan sikandin su warad on dalan din to oghawi to sikan no ingkasaliu rin. No agad to nigsinogow sikandin, warad pulus su kono ogkahawi.
Tongod to batasan noy to pog-ampu noy, kara simana, darua no allow no oglangkad a ogkoon. Woy ogbogoy a koykow to songo igkasampulu to agad nokoy no ogkoutol ku.’ Sikan ka kagi to Parisiu.
“Pogdinog ni Moisis to sikan no kagi, nakapallaguy on no dio mokougpo to mariu no ugpaan to Midian. Dio nangasawa si Moisis. No pogkalugoy, daruwa on ka anak din no lukos.”
Ian su ko ogkaliwanan ka songo lunsud no talagpanubad, og-awoson to songo ogkaliwanan dod ka tahan no Balaod.
Nokani, nigbautismuan kow ni Huan dio to woig. Di kono no malugoy no ogbogayan kow on to Gimukud to Magboboot.”
bagtok
Sikan ian to ogpoomotan ku ka igpohimu rin kanak su ligkat to dayagang no imbogoy rin kanak no ogligkat to dakol no kabogbogan din.
pusil
Ka payung nu no linggon no nalingawan nu to og-angoy diò to songo baloy, ogkabalagad on. Sikan ka ogpakatu-us; konò ogkasagman. Ogkatugunan
logod
Di unawa to ogkasaligan ta ka kinagian to Magboboot, songo tu-tuu ian ka ignangon noy kaniu.
tilad
hi-os
Nò, wawalu woy ko sampulu do no allow ka ig–ugpo ni Pistu dio to Hirusalim woy niglibong dio to Sisaria. Mapawo, nigpinpinnuu si Pistu to pogboboot din no nigsugu to igpaangoy on si Pablo.
Ka otow no du-on kuglung, nigkuò to bislig no intagpos to kuglung din.
‘Soini no mgo otow,’ kagi to Magboboot, ‘ogtahuron a nikandan di kagi ran do duon. Nakasuwoy ka kandan no goinawa to koddi no goinawa; mariu man sikandan koddi.
Woy nataga kow to waro noy sayaa sikaniu no igpaabin noy ko nokoy ka igkapurut noy dio to kaniu. Woy waro ingkoholos noy su waro tuud noy to oyow duon poron salapi now no ogkapurut noy. Ka Magboboot ka ogpakamalogot to sikan.
Nò, agad to sikan ka innangon woy ni Pablo no igsapad to mgo otow, kono poron ogpasapad su oghimatoy poron to ayam no igtubad kandan.
Duon sagboka no otow no nig-agpas no nigpurut to molintok no kotson. Nig-olod din to mangilu no bino woy intiuk din to tukod din ka sika kotson oyow ogsupsupon ni Hisus.
Pogdinog to kapitan to sikan no kagi ni Pablo, nighondio pad to igbuyag to mgo sundalu no kagi rin to, “Manio to ogpabarasan nu kanami ka otow no nasakup to Ruma?”
ambutot
Di ka Labow no Talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu woy ka mgo duma ran no mgo Sadusiu, tibo nabolu su lagboy on ian no noima.
Nò, ko tongod to batasan to Magboboot to og-alam ko hondoi no otow ka oghimuon din no sakup, kono ki ogpakanangon to kono no litos ka oghimuon din
Di duon igkasasow ku su, ko ogpokouma ad on dio to kaniu, songo kuwo buwa ko duon ogkakitaan ku no mgo hinimuan now to kono no litos ku. Woy songo kuwo buwa ko duon ogkakitaan now dii to kanami no songo kono now ogkoiniatan. No ian igkasasow ku ko ogpokouma ad on dio to kaniu no ogkitoon ku to duon ogmoog-ogotoy woy ko ka ogkoima, ko ogpokoglangot ko oglogoron woy ko ogpanlomot to duma ran woy ko duon ka ogpanalosob woy ko duon ka ogparakoldakol woy ko ogsamuksamuk.
Sikan ian, su sikanami ka nighondio to kaniu nokani no nig-alap koy to sikan no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu, ko kuntoon og-udling koy kaniu, kono koy ogpasubla to katondanan noy.
Ian su duon ka impasulat to Magboboot dongan no kagi rin to, “Ka nigdatong on ka allow no imboot ku, nigpamminog a to pog-ampu now. No pogdatong ka allow to ogbuligan ku sikaniu no nigpangabangan kud sikaniu.” Nò, mgo sulod, pamminog kow. Kuntoon do ka allow no litos to oyow ogkapangabangan ka agad hontow to mgo salo din.
pasad
Nò, duon mgo Parisiu no nakaamut to sikan no nalibulung no mgo otow no nigkagi ki Hisus to, “Maistru, sapari nu pa ka mgo hibatoon nu no ogsasayo koykow.”
Woy ogbuyu koy to oyow ogkabantayan koy rin oyow kono koy ogpakasagad to mgo otow no mangungulug su duon mgo otow no waro nigtuu ki Hisus.
Songo oghingaran noy no ma-agul ka solod to so-i no baloy.
Ogkoiniatan ku poron ko tibo kow ogpakakagi to sikan no loinloin no mgo kinagian no ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot. Di ka lagboy ku no ogkoiniatan, ko ogpakakagi kow tibo to sikan no igpanangon to Gimukud to Magboboot to kanta no kinagian. Dakoldakol ka pulus to sikan no otow no ogpakakagi to sikan no igpanangon to Gimukud to Magboboot no ogkasabutan to sikan no otow no ogpakakagi to loinloin no mgo kinagian no kono ogkasabutan. Di ko duon otow no ogbogayan to lituk, songo ogkapulusan su ogkohogot ka pogtuu to tibo no mgo nigtuu.
Waro man ongkori to Magboboot ka mgo otow no nigpanoy rin abina no sakup. Natagaan now poron ka innangon to Tahan no Kasulatan tongod to kagi ni Elias no nignangonan din ka Magboboot to maroot no mgo hinimuan to mgo duma rin no pinanganak ni Israil.
Ko tigbal dò nighiup si Hisus
pangapian
ulu
Kono og-apul sikandin woy kono ogbabansagon. Songo kono din ogpaagbotan ka kandin no kagi ko og-anad dio to dalan to mgo lunsud.
Ogboklason to boi ka lagut to ikam no oghiyabon din.
Ka otow no kono ogparoog ki Satanas, ogpakinaboon ku uromo to maputi. Woy kono ku og-awoon ka mgo ngaran dan dio to sulatanan to mgo ngaran to mgo otow no ogbogayan to kouyagan no waro katamanan. No ko dio ad on to tangkaan to Amoy ku no Magboboot woy to tangkaan to mgo suguanon din no mgo diwata, ogtokoron ku to sakup ku sikandan.
Amana so-ini no batò no ungod ogsinogow no ma-agol so bo-bò.
To nokouma on, nig-inso dan to, “Soini ka anak now no innangon now to nabutud ligkat to pogkootow rin? Manio buwa to ogpakakita on sikandin?”
Ogmonuon now to ogtuu koddi su ogmol-olinoy kow ro ogmasaysayooy di waro kow nigpoomot to ogkasayo kow to bugtung no Magboboot.”
kuò
balintu-ad
umotung
Ian su dakoldakol ka katouanan to Magboboot, no sikan ian ka nigboot sikandin to oyow waro otow no ogpakataga to kandin ko dio do ogligkat to kandan do no katouanan. Di agad ko duon mgo otow no nahan dan no waro pulus, noiniatan atag to Magboboot to oyow ian ogkapangabangan ka mgo otow no ogtuu on to soini no ignangonnangon noy tongod ki Hisu Kristu.
logdak
Ogso-so-on now to bibinayu.
ngula
ilun
Mgo sulod noy no indakoli to goinawa to Magboboot, tibo sikan ka igkasayo noy su nataga koy to pig-alam kow rin oyow ogkohimu kow on no sakup din.
Woy malasi ogkagi sikandan to igpanungayow no songo igmasakit lagboy to goinawa to mgo otow no ogpakarinog.
Nokoy naan ka inhondio now to sikan no holholawan? Ian buwa oyow ogpitawon now ka songo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot? Hoo,” kagi ni Hisus, “labow pad no talagnangon ka nakitaan now
To nigdinog on dio to songo baloy ran to sikan no ingkohoy-u to Magboboot kandin, songo narago sikandan.
Ko du-on diò to songo barrio on ka ogka-alap, inat to mgo sakup din tibò.
Woy,” kagi, “duon pad mgo otow no ogligkat kai lagboy to kaniu no ogbalowbalow to kinagian to Magboboot oyow duon mgo otow no ogpasakup kandan.
lupsup
Amunaan, nighipanow on woy si Hisus no niglogoblogob dan ka mgo lunsud to Galilia oyow ogwali duon to mgo anaranan to mgo og-ampu woy pigdogil din ka mgo busow duon to lawa to mgo otow.
tagbu
No ko oghiupon on to sikan no igkapitu no diwata to Magboboot ka bungag no oggongonan din, ogkatuman on ka tuud to Magboboot no nokani ingkoholos di impohitaga rin on dongan to mgo suguanon din no talagnangon to kinagian din.”
Nokogtimpa ka darua no katari su warò nigsosokod.
Ugsul ka dio’t ampow su itu-os a [to’ghibat].
Ka batò no ogko-omaw, ogligkat to pogko-otow rin taman to ogkabuyag on sikandin no omaw rod ian sikandin.
pukan
Nò to nalimud on ka tibo no mgo otow, nig-inso si Pilatu to, “Hontow ka ogkoiniatan now no ogpalibuwason ku? Si Barabas woy ko si Hisus no oghingaran to Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan?”
No sikan no allow no insabal dan ka lawa ni Hisus, ian allow to mgo taga Hudia no igpanagana ran to Allow ran to Oghimoloy woy to og-ampu. Magaan ogbunsud ka Allow ran to Oghimoloy su to batasan dan, ogpakabunsud to maapun to nokohun-a no allow.
Woy soini rod ka insabut to Magboboot dongan to og–uyagon din on si Hisus ligkat to kamatayon din woy to kono ogkamolu ka lawa rin. Ian su impasulat din to, ‘Tu–tuu ian no ogtumanon ku koykow ka innangon ku dongan ki Dabid no mgo karoyawan.’
Sikan ian no ogdakopon dan porom si Hisus di nahallok sikandan to nalibulung no mgo otow su dio to goinawa to mgo otow, songo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot si Hisus.
Ka bala-an ka do-isok no liang no ogkatago-an to ngalap to woig.
su oyow uromo, ka tibo no dio to Langit woy ka kai to tano, woy ka dio to ugpaanan to mgo nammatoy, tibo ogpakaluhud woy ogpakasayo ki Hisu Kristu ko ogdinogon dan ka ngaran din.
Ka otow no kono ogtiang to krus din su ogkahallok to ogkamatoy, kono ogkohimu no hibatoon ku.
“Bunsud kuntoon, ko lalimma pananglitan ka otow dio to songo baloy, ogkabaad ka sikan no lalimma, no ka tatolu, ogmaap-apuloy to sikan no darua.
Konò ogka-ayun ko ogka-ag-ag ka nasubid su ogdokot.
samba
tagbis
bagwanan
batang
Nò, ko nokouma dio woy si Hisus, nignangonan sikandin to hop-at on no allow ka insabal si Lasaru dut pilang.
kogsik
Ko oghinallokon kid to busow, an-anayan ogkagi to, "Mmm". Takas sikan, du-on ogpati-ulug dii to tangka-an ta.
Agad sikan no otow no ogkitoon a rin, songo ogpakakita ka nigsugu koddi.
hapun
Og-osonon ta [ka og-uranda] to, "Ungod ka og-u-uranda
Nò, ka igkapapitu no diwata to Magboboot, songo imbus-ug din ka tagu to kandin no boung dio to aw-awangan. No duon maagbot no lagong no nigligkat to pinpinuuanan to pogboboot to Lagboy no Igbuyag no duon to Dakol no Ampuanan. Kagi rin to, “Napongaan on.”
tungul
Nò, su ka pog-abin to Magboboot, nigligkat to pogkohoy-u rin kandan, kono ogkohimu ko ka pog-abin din kandan, ogligkat to mgo hinimuan dan. Ko pananglitan pa nig-abin to Magboboot sikandan su ligkat to mgo hinimuan dan ko maroyow, kono ogkohimu to, ka pog-abin din kandan, nigligkat do to pogkohoy-u to Magboboot.
Sikan ian ka ogkatagaan ka maroot no doromdom dan no nokoholos to goinawa ran. No sikoykow, Maria, puun to sikan, masakit lagboy so goinawa nu no ogkounawa to magalang no moirob no og-agbas dio to pusung nu,” kagi ni Simion ki Maria.
Ian su sikaniu ka igmalogot no sulat noy su ogkounawa to ka katondanan noy, dio insulat to goinawa now. No ka sikan, igpabasa woy igpatokod dio to agad hondoi no otow to litos ka in-anad noy kaniu.
limot
‘Hondio kad no nangnangoni nu ka soini no mgo otow to, “Ogdinog kow to nangnangonon ku di kono kow ogpakasabut. Duon ogkakitaan now, di kono kow ogpakabatuk ko nokoy ian ka kalitukan to ogkitoon now.
so-ip
labid
korol
Dio to Hirusalim, si Annas darua ki Kaipas ka mgo Labow to mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu. Sikan pad ka mgo igbuyag dio to mgo ugpaan to si Huan no anak ni Sakarias, dio mog-ugpo to holholawan to probinsia Hudia no nokouma kandin no kagi to Magboboot.
Malogot ka soin no kagi ku kaniu. Agad hontow, ko ogpoinum kaniu to agad songo basu no woig su nigtuu kow koddi, ogkabogayan sikandin to igdasag puun to Magboboot.”
kuò
Nò. Og-ayad-ayad ki. Og-awoson to ian ta ro ogkagion woy ogdoromdomon ka tu-tuu ro su ian ka ogkounawa to holon ta. Ka maroyow ro ka oghimuon ta su ian ka ogkounawa to putow no igpangalasag kai to sosolobon ta.
doyow
“Mgo pogbuyagon woy mgo tahuronon to mgo otow, ko og–inso kow kanami to soini no karoyawan no nohimu to soini no napulid, woy ko og–inso kow ko hondoi nigligkat ka ingkoulii to lawa rin,
Sikan dod no allow, nigdalapak ka mgo Sadusiu ki Hisus. Kono ogtuu sikandan to ogkabuhi uromo ka mgo otow no namatoy. Nò, nig-insaan dan si Hisus to,
timalud
dokapart
Dakol igkasipod noy.
Ian su magaan nighoo to pogbuyu noy kandin. No kono no sikan do, di sikandin lagboy ka nigboot to oglibong dio to kaniu.
Igpo-obuk to komos ka uran.
Di agad to waro nigtuu ka mohon-ing no mgo pinanganak ni Israil, kono ki ogdoromdom to nig-ongkoran to Magboboot ka mgo sakup din no Hudiu, su sikanak no si Pablo, songo Hudiu a no pinanganak a rod ni Abraham no kaap-apuan ku rod si Abraham woy pinanganak a rod ni Binhamin no songo pinanganak ni Abraham.
Omunaan no nig-anad ku sikandan pinabayo to pananglitan su oyow ogpitow di kono sikandan ogpakakita, ogdinogon dan di kono sikandan ogpakasabut.
òpalis
tikintikin
toin
mahal
Ogpasalamatan tanow ka Magboboot no ian Magboboot woy Amoy to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu su ligkat to nasagboka kinow on ki Kristu, nohoy-uan kinow on to Magboboot. Ian su dio to Langit, nigbogayan kinow rin to tibo no karoyawon no ogligkat to Gimukud din.
Ko du-on jeep no nasirà no awos no og-alapon diò to shop oyow ogdoyroyawon, songo igpaganuy rod to dangob no jeep.
Woy hontow ka nigsapaan to Magboboot to konad on ogpakasolod to sikan no intagad din poron kandan no himolayan ko kono no sikan dod no mgo otow no nanligal dongan kandin?
tapa
Ko ogkasaklupan ka to mausilom, mohirap nu to ogdatong to ugpa-an nu su mausilom on ka ogbaya-an nu.
Di ko ogpangasawa ka, kono ka ogpakasalo. Woy ko duon dalaga no ogkaasawa on songo waro salo din. Di ogkoiniatan ku to ogkaligaran kow porom to mgo igkabaybayari to mgo otow no duon on asawa.
Igsugbuk sikan hari nu
No nigdogil ni Galiu ka mgo Hudiu oyow makaawo on to sikan no husayanan.
di magaan ogkaatangi to mgo igkasasow ran, mgo igkarago dan to salapi woy ka igkoiniatan dan to duma no kalaglagan dan no sikan ian ka ogpokoumos on to nangnangonon to Magboboot no kono dan oghalinon ka batasan dan oyow madmaroyow.
Di si Saulo, nigbayadbayad to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus. No nigpansoloran din ka mgo baloy no duon otow no nigtuu. No agad lukos to boi, pigdakop din woy impapirisu rin on.
Woy waro mahallok si Saulo to ognangonnangon to mgo otow tongod to ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no ni Hisus. Pig–al–alukuy rin ka mgo Hudiu no ogkagi to kinagian no Ginirigu woy nig–apulan din sikandan tongod to pogtuu ki Hisus. Di noiniatan dan no oghimatayan sikandin.
Ko ogmasakit ka pa-a, ogkingkingon to oghipanow oyow konò ogka-agbotan ka igdi-ok.
Ko konò ogpakatokad ka kalabow, igbolbol to woig no ogka-anlas. Di ko ogpakatokad ka kalabow, songo ogbolbol ka oglapas.
dokad di
bu-ayan
Tu-tuu ian ka soini no nangnangonon no litos no ogtuuon ta to waro igduwaruwa ta, to nighondii si Hisu Kristu to soini no tano oyow ogkapangabangan din ka mgo otow no makasasalo. No sikanak, labow ka kanak no salo to duma no makasasalo no otow
nu
Ko nakapongan nigkagi, nig-ilob si Hisus dio to tano no pig-amutan din ka ilob din to basak. Nò, impoid din ka basak dio to mata to sikan no nabutud.
bogbog
Pan-abin din ka konò no hari rin. Layun ogsulodsulod kanta.
sakoy
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ko ogkasipod ka songo otow to ognangon to koddi ka igbuyag din woy ko ogkasipod to ig-anad ku kuntoon, sikandin ka igkasipod to Kakoy to Koot-otawan to poglibong din kai to tano lagkos to kandin no kalayagi woy ka kalayagi to Amoy rin mgo diwata no suguonon to Magboboot.
ligò
payò
Ka buyag on no mgo boi, unawaa nu ka pogpitow nu ko inoy nu. No ka mgo boi no harihari koykow, unawaa nu to ataboy nu no maawanga nu to ka goinawa nu kandan.
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Woy ogpakarogil to soin no busow ko ogsampiton ka Magboboot.”
Pogdinog to talagbantoy to pirisuan to kagi ni Pablo, nig–umow to ogpahatod to mgo ilawan no igbat–ow rin. No nig–agpas no nigsolod to pirisuan. Nigkolkol su nahallok, no nigluhud on to tangkaan ni Pablo daruwa ki Silas su ogpohoy–uhoy–u.
No kono no sikan do di ogkaanad ka sikan no mgo balu to ogkapogul no ungod do duon ogpanpanumbaloy. Di kono no sikan do di ogpanalosobon dan ka mgo duma ran no ian dan ogsagmanon ka waro labot dan no ignangon dan ka kono no litos no igkanangon.
imù
Ognangonan ta to, “Pango-on ka” oyow ogdakol ka ogko-onon din.
bu-og
Du-on otow no niggabas to kayu no togop ka ogtablonon din.
Nighutuk ni Hisus samsama ka mata to lukos. Namitowpitow ka sikan no lukos no nabawian on ka mata rin. Maawang on ka pogpitow rin.
Tonosa’n ka kalaglagan nu; ogkalagak.
nanoy
“Nò, pigpoumow to datu ka sinaligan din. Kagi to datu kuwo kandin to, ‘Nokoy soini no maroot no narinog ku tongod koykow? Bogayi a to listaan to tibo no pogbantoy nu su kono kud on ogsaligan sikoykow.’
Sikanak ian no si Pablo ka lagboy ogsulat to soini no ignangon ku to ogdoromdomon ku sikaniu. No to tibo no sulat ku, sikan ian ka batasan ku to ogsulat.
Warad tapid no ogkaroromdom dan no maroot no oghimuon dan woy nigmaroot ka goinawa ran to mgo duma ran. Noibogan dan ka kalaglagan to duma ran woy nigmaroot ka mgo batasan dan. Ungod ogkoima to duma ran, ogpamunu, ogpoog-ogotoy, oggawayan dan ka duma ran, oghisakitan dan woy ogtalosobon dan.
Nò ian ku ignangon, ko duon on pogtuu ta di kono ogpakalagkos to maroyow no oghimuon ta, ian ogkounawaan ka lawa ta no namatoy on man ko warad goinawa. Ian su songo waro pulus to sikan no pogtuu ta.
dongos
ilus
angkon
mamò
pupu
Ko ogpohitagoon on ka sikan no talaglop-ang to Balaod, ogpakaalap sikandin to kabogbogan ni Satanas woy ligkat to dakol no kabogbogan din, duon oghimuon din no mgo ubat-ubat no kabolbolonganan woy ka igpoindan din poron to katondanan din.
Woy ogsuguon ku ka mgo diwata to Magboboot dio to katamanan to soin no kalibutan. Igpabung-ag ku sikandan to maagbot woy oglimuron dan ka mgo nig-alam ku no mgo otow ligkat to agad hondoi to hangiliran to kalibutan.”
pakow
pulù
lagap
Igwalas nu ka pori ki Boyow.
hanhan
Du-on bolok to batò ko darua on no simana ligkat to pogko-otow rin. Og-unuk to gatas din. Ogka-awò dò ka bolok din ko dakol on.
Ka otow no ogsayow to gimbal ogbabanoy to manggad no darua.
Ponora nu ka goinawa nu
pu-il
nokani
Di duon dangob no kinagian to Magboboot no impasulat din tongod to mgo pinanganak ni Israil. Kagi rin to: “Nahapunan a ka ungod ad og-imuimu to mgo otow to oyow ogdani poron kanak. Di kono man ogpaagad-agad woy malasi ogligal kanak.”
Songo kon-u noy sikoykow kitaa no nigdaralu kad woy ko napirisu kad no nanumbaloy koy dio to koykow?’
taloytoy
Ka otow no ogkatigbas, ogkapilak, ogkapusilan, ogkabalatik, ogkasalungag, ogkasial, tibò so-ini ogkapali-an.
Nighutuk man do nig-inso si Hisus ki Pedro to, “Simon, anak ni Huan, dakol ka goinawa nu koddi?” Masakit on so goinawa ni Pedro to soini so igkatatolu no inso ko duon goinawa rin kandin. No, nigtabak to, “Buyag, nataga ka to tibo. Nataga ka man to dakol ian ka goinawa ku koykow.” Kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandin, “Bantayi nu ka mgo karniru ku.”
Nig-alam pad ni Hisus si Matiu, si Tomas, woy si Santiago no ian anak ni Alpiu, woy ka dangob no si Simon no nighingaranan dan ka Siloti sikandin.
omonu
Ka Magboboot no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy mabogbog, nigkita ro ka baad to salapi no inholos now no igbayad poron to mgo otow no nigkakamot to tano now. Woy songo nigdinog dod sikandin to ig-am-amulung to mgo otow no nanggaani to nig-uma no kamot now.
lupang
Ogpakapasalamat a to Magboboot to nabogayan a to ogkagi to sikan no loinloin no mgo kinagian no subla pad kaniu tibo.
galat
sopang
Ka otow no nigdaldal on to maagbut no kalamag, nigtukog to tagtu-on oyow kono ogkapolod ka baloy rin.
kalamag
isog
Sikan ian, ka tibo no kalaglagan no nighimu to Magboboot kai to tano woy ka dio to langit, ogkounawa to ogpakatagad sikandan to allow no og-uyagon on to Magboboot ka mgo otow no nohimu on no anak din. No ogbogayan din sikandan to mgo karoyawon no impanagana rin kandan.
Manipis to sopi-on!
bukbuk
topal
kohulus so goinawa
tangus
Ko ogsalop ka allow, ogkabunbunan to ogmausilom ka tano.
sigbol
Nigsayo a koykow, Amo kai to soin no kalibutan tongod to napongaan kud on ka insugu nud koddi.
Ogpaka-aligu si Mery ka oghondiò to iskuilaan su warò bot-os no dalan kai to marani.
Tongod to masakit ka gotok nu woy ka mgo dalu nu no malasi nu gorama, kono ka og-inum to woig do di inum ka ro to malintok do no inumanon.
botong
Nò, nig-inso si Hisus to mgo otow, “Ogmonuon to sika tagtuun? Oghondio sikandin to sikan no pinamula rin woy ogpohimatayan din ka sikan no mgo lukos no talagbantoy no ogpasoipan din to loin no mgo otow no ogbantoy.”
bumbav
Su nigdinog sikandin to ogkohingaranan ka ngaran din, nigtoom to du-on nigmaro-ot kandin.
lapi
Ka mgo otow no ogbot-os ka ogligkat to Tagasan, ogtakorog to bubungan ka oglampoy ka oghipanow no ogliling on ka ogtupang ka oghondiò to Maambago.
butakal
ula-ula
Ingkatalaran nu ka goinawa nu diò to Maambago.
No kagi to igbuyag dan kuwo to mgo otow rin no nigsasindog to longod din to, ‘Kua now on ka sika sagboka no salapi no bulawan woy ibogoy now ro dio to sikan no suguonon no duon sampulu no salapi.’
Agad to malotoy ka lawa ni Hisus no namatoy on to krus, di ligkat to kabogbogan to Magboboot, nouyag on si Hisus to waro katamanan. No ogkounawa ro kanami no nasagboka kandin su ogkaalang-alang koy to katouanan noy. Di to pog-alap noy kaniu, ogkakitaan to ogkabuligan koy to kabogbogan to Magboboot woy to sikandin ian ka ogdumaruma kanami.
Nò, pogpitow ku man do, narinog ku ka maagbot no mgo lagong to pila buwa no malan no malan no mgo diwata to Magboboot. No kono man ogkasool. No nanlingutlingut sikandan to sikan no nigpinpinnuuan to Lagboy no Igbuyag woy to sikan no hop-at no mgo hinimu woy to sikan no mgo pogbuyagon.
dulus
Kagi ran, “Nangoni koy ko kon-u buwa ogkagulak ka Dakol no Ampuanan woy nangoni koy kun ko nokoy ka mgo ogkoindanan ta oyow ogkataga koy.”
Nigparagas nighondio woy si Hisus to lunsud to Hiriku su dio ian ogpakabayo sikandan.
dingil
hilamon
biod
apulon
bingow
Ka otow, nig-alad din ka lobut to durian no nigbogas oyow warò otow no ogko-ulugan to bogas to durian din.
Duon mgo otow no nig-alap dan dio ki Hisus ka otow no nabutud woy nabongol su nasoloran to busow. Nigbawian ni Hisus sikandin no paragas nakakita woy nakakagi ka sikan no otow.
Soini ka lituk to kagi ku to ogloinloinon now kun ka goinawa now su duon mgo otow dio to kaniu no ognangon to sikanak no si Pablo ka og-unugon dan, woy duon duma no ognangon to si Apulus ka og-unugon dan. No duon pad man do duma no oghonduon to ian dan og-unugon, si Kristu.
polis
Nigkagi si Hisus. Kagi rin, “Duon katondanan nu koddi su nabogayan ka to Magboboot. Ko waro ka rin mabogayi, waro man porom katondanan nu koddi. Nò, sikan no otow no inhatod a rin kai to kaniu, niglabow ka salo din.”
Natulimpas ka papaya.
Agad hondoi otow no oglop-ang to agad sagboka no sugu to Magboboot, woy ig-anad din to duma rin oyow songo ogpalop-ang to sugu, sika otow no nig-anad, malintok lagboy sikandin uromo. Di ka otow no ogtuman to tibo no sugu to Magboboot woy ig-anad din to duma din oyow ogtuman to sugu, sikan no otow no nig-anad, dakol lagboy sikandin uromo ko ogkatuman on ka Pogsugu to Magboboot kai to tano.
tollu
dapig
ogba-aron
Woy si Pilipi, woy si Bartolomi, woy si Tomas, woy si Matiu no talagkubla to buhis, woy si Santiago no anak ni Alpiu, woy si Tadiu.
No pogkaponga ran to in–untud ka balutu dio to barku, nigbanggutan dan on ka barku oyow kono ogkagulak to mgo luwak. Woy nighusuran dan on ka dakol no manggad no ogpakaalap to barku ko duon kalamag, su ogkahallok to ogganlad ka barku duon to natikobaanan no dio to diralom to woig no duon to marani to Libya. Sikan ian no naalap koy ro to kalamag.
lagtang
Si Aram amoy ni Aminadab. Si Aminadab, amoy ni Naasom. Si Naasom amoy ni Salmon.
dayagang
No nignangon si Hisus kanta to duon kouyagan no igbogoy rin no waro ogkatamanan.
magalawa
Su sikan ian mgo sulod, nokoy ka tuud to ingkabogoy ka sikan no Balaod to Magboboot? Hoo su oyow ogtokoron ta to duon mgo salo ta. Nigtuuran to Magboboot to woy on ogkataman ka sikan no Balaod din ko ogpokouma on ka sikan no kapunganan ni Abraham no innangon to Magboboot no igbogoy rin. Di ka sikan no Balaod, impahatod din to mgo diwata dio to sagboka no otow no talagpataliwaro to mgo otow.
No kuntoon,” kagi ni Pablo, “Oglogparan kad to Magboboot no ogkabutud ka pad to pila no allow. No agad ka layag to allow, kono ka pad ogkita.” Sikan do ian no niggoram ni Ilimas ka ogkoiling to gapun no nigmarusilom on ka pogpitow rin. No nigpangalabol on su ogpamangho ko duon otow no ogkitkit kandin.
bayaku
No ka mgo batasan now, songo ogkohimu on no olin-olin no maroyow no ogligkat to igpohimu ni Hisu Kristu to goinawa now su oyow ogkatahud woy ogkasayo ka Magboboot.
Sikan no otow no kono ogpalinggalat dii to koddi, ogkounawa sikandin to sugpang no ogtamporon dio to lawa rin no ogkagangow on. Oglimuron ka mgo nagangu no sugpang woy ogsilaban on soini.
mokkagn
Ko du-on ka ogkagis to bulu to mo-irob, lagboy no mangilu to pogdinog ta.
Orag-orag no oghilu so-i tapilak.
Soini, mgo sulod, ka kalitukan to kagi ku. Su malopot naan do ka allow ta woy oglibong si Hisus, sikan ian, ligkat kuntoon, sikaniu no mgo lukos no duon on asawa now, hunnaa now tumana ka igpatuman ni Hisus kaniu unawa ko waro pad asawa now.
Nokoy so nigkuò nu?
Igtulang kat abu.
Di ko ogkabat-awan on ka mgo hinimuan to mgo otow, ogkatagaan on ko hondoi ka maroyow woy ko maroot.
Di sikanta no nakasabut to sikan, og-awoson to og-ayad-ayad ki no ogdoromdomon ta ka sikan no ingkabogoy kanta no boot ta su songo kuwo buwa ko ligkat to kanta no hinimuan, ogkaatangan ka pogtuu to duma ta no moolmol pad ka pogkasabuti rin.
pasku
O, songo nigbautismuan ku ka songo lunggunan no si Istipanas. Di waro dio to doromdom ku ko duon dod duma no nigbautismuan ku.
Ko nanumbaloy a, nakasalangan a to ogko-on. Kagi a to, “Ogmangoko-on kow na-an.
Di mohon-ing ka og-unug to mgo maroot no batasan to sikan no mgo ubaton no mgo talag-anad. No ligkat to sikan duon duma no mgo otow no ogdoot to tu-tuu ian no dalan.
hilabot
“To tigbogas on to sikan no ubas, nigsugu to tagtuun ka sagboka no suguonon din dio to mgo otow no ogbantoy to pinamula su ogkuon din poron ka kandin no bahin. Di ka mgo nigbantoy, nigbarasan dan ka suguonon din no nigpouli dan on to waro naalap din to agad nokoy.”
Ko ognangonan nu ka songo otow to, “Ba-ad kad on to homoy”, ogpurut sikandin to tongà.
angkon
Ian su ka Gimukud to Magboboot no ingkabogoy rin kanta, kono ogbogoy kanta to goinawa ta no magaan ogkahallok, di ogbogayan ki rin to kabogbogan woy ka dakol no goinawa ta to duma ta woy to oyow ogkaponod ta ka goinawa ta.
bayad
sonob
so-ikan
lu-ag
No, ka sikan no kagi rin to duon oghutukon no ogluboon din, ian ka igpasabut kanta to ogluboon din ka mgo nigpanhimu rin, no ogkaawo on ka ogkawoil oyow ian do ogkagalat ka kono ogkawoil.
Ian su ognangon kow to salapian kow woy to maroyow ka pog-ugpo no waro og-awoson now. Dokad di to waro kow mataga to mokohoy-uhoy-u kow naan lagboy su ian now ogkounawaan ka naayuayu no nalobasan woy nabutud.
inagak
Manumtumalag koy dò; kò kow manduma no mongo boi.
Kagi ni Sakarias no og-inso to diwata to, “Nokoy ka igmaganangon nu koddi oyow ogkatagaan kud to malogot ian ka soini innangon nu koddi kuntoon to og-anak pad ka asawa ku, su olin koy on no buyag?”
Pogkaponga on ni Hisus ka tibo no impohimu kandin, nohimu on no Talagpangabang to tibo no mgo otow no ogpaagad-agad kandin oyow ogkabogayan sikandan to kouyagan no waro ogkatamanan.
bobonod
bog-ang
Nigtabak ni Hisus no nig-inso to, “Koykow ka sagboka no nabantug no maistru to tinuuan to mgo Hudiu woy kono ka ogpakasabut to soin?
bot-os
Du-on otow no nigulak to konò no baloy ran no nigda-atda-at din ka mgo alabat.
bakus
pamisli-on
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu. Sikan no otow no ogtuu, ogkouyag no waro katamanan.
I-ampu koy ro to Magboboot oyow ogkabogayan koy to igliwak noy oyow ogpakatood koy no ignangonnangon noy ka dongan no waro pad ipohitaga tongod ki Hisu Kristu. No sikan ian to soini ad to pirisuan su nig-alap-alap a to sikan no nangnangonon.
balintu-ad
No nig–ungod dod nigkagi si Pedro to igmalogot to ignangonnangon din woy nigtaloson din ka mgo otow to, “Pangabangi now ka mgo lawa now su oyow kono kow ogpakalagkos to logpad no ogpokouma to soini kuntoon no mgo otow no kono ogpaagad–agad to Magboboot.”
Sikan ian ka inso ni Pilatu su nataga to inhatod to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad si Hisus su ogkoima sikandan kandin.
Talagtamong to gu-os
Ko oglapas ki, ko konò ki ogpakabatuk to mababow su mabolbol ka woig, ogka-alus ki diò to maralom.
“Mohon-ing pad porom ka ignangon ku kaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, kuwo to mgo hibatoon din, “di kono kow pad ogpakasabut.
layag
latìn
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan no nig-inso to, “Hontow ka inoy ku? Hontow ka mgo hari ku?”
No, nighoy-uan ni Hisus sikandan. Nigsamsam din ka mgo mata ran, woy paragas nakakita sikandan. To nakakita on sikandan, nigduma on sikandan ki Hisus.
Waswasi’n ka homoy oyow ogkagangu.
No to songo karusiloman, duon impapitow ki Pablo no nigpaatawan kandin no nigligkat to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus. Kagi ni Hisus ki Pablo to, “Kono ka ogkahallok to mgo otow. Di nangnangoni nu sikandan no kono kad og–ul–ulung to pognangon.
Di waro nigkagi si Hisus; waro tabak din. Nighutuk nig-inso ka Labow to mgo Talagpanubad, to, “Ogkoiniat a no kai ki to tangkaan to Magboboot, nangoni koy ko sikoykow ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan no ian ka anak to Magboboot.”
loklok
posò
mangayow
Sikan ian, kono kow on no mgo uripon to sikan no Balaod di mgo anak kow on to Magboboot. Woy su anak kow on sikaniu, ogsalupung kow on to tibo no igbogoy rin to Anak din.
Nò, nigduma pad to mgo sundalu si Hisus dio to sikan no dakol no baloy to gobirnador. Ka tibo no mgo sundalu dio, nalimud dio ki Hisus.
Pangabaga a nu; igkarua a nu no igbuyag.
Sikan ian su kono no ogpakasolod ka koonon ta dio to goinawa ta ko kono no dio to gotok ta ogpakasabuk woy oglibuwas do to lawa ta.” To soini ka kagi ni Hisus, ogpohitagoon din no litos ka tibo no ogkakoon.
alakansi
“Nigbobootan to Magboboot sikandan oyow kono ogpakakita to dalan dio to kandin. Nigpamootan din to makogal so ulu ran oyow kono ogpakasabut to nangnangonon din. Pighonduon to Magboboot oyow kono ogpakatangko kandin su oyow og-awoon din ka salo dan.
Duon sagboka no sakup ni Hisus no kagi rin kandin to, “Buyag ogdagdagow a pad bag og-uli su kona a ogpakaruma koykow su oglobong a pad to amoy ku.”
Ka duma man do no boni, dio makasawod to sapiniton no nigpandagom on ka pinamula rin woy nigtubu ka mgo sapinit no nabodboran to lawa to pinamula no noomus on no wa makabogas.
Soini ka innangon dan oyow ogkatuman ka innangon ni Hisus to kamatayon din to oghimatayan ka lawa rin dio to krus.
Impariralom to Magboboot ki Hisu Kristu ka tibo to agad nokoy no nohimu woy insabuk din on si Hisus no Lagboy no Igbuyag to tibo no mgo nigtuu kandin oyow ogkabuligan din sikandan.
Tibo soini, binunsuran pad to mgo igkoirapi to mgo otow no ogkounawa to sagboka no boi no tigbal pad no oghayoran.”
samboy
bakò
Ma-agul ka luang to balutu ka poghimu.
No agad maallow woy ko marusilom, ungod koy og-ampu no ogbuyu to Magboboot oyow igbogoy rin no oghondio koy to kaniu no ogpakitkitooy kinow woy to oyow og-anaron noy sikaniu oyow kono ogkaalang-alang ka pogtuu now.
boyow
Waro now doromdoma to nigpanlotiblotib ku ka mgo paan no lalima no nangoon ka lalima no libu no mgo otow? Pila ka samo?
Niglibong man do dio to mgo hibatoon din di nokohirogo man do su ogkohirogo lagboy sikandan. Poghimata ran, waro kandan mataga ko nokoy ka igkagi ran.
Og-unuk no batò.
Ogma-agbot ka kalamag.
Ko batò ki pad nokani, li-ag dò ka natagaan ta.
panoru
Pogkaponga to pogkoon dan, impouli ni Hisus ka mgo otow. To sikandin nig-untud to balutu no nighondio sikandin to lunsud no oghingaranan to Magadan.
Nigtabak pad si Hisus to, “Soini ka malogot no ogkagion ku koykow, Usi, to agad hontow, kono ogpakasolod sikandin to Pogsugu to Magboboot ko kono ogpokootow sikandin pinabayo to woig woy pinabayo to Gimukud to Magboboot.
pungpung
sakolawon, no woy makasakow so datù to kayu
Ko dio, nigdalapak ki Hisus ka songo otow no ibungon no nigluhud no nigbuyu to ogbuligan sikandin no kagi rin, “Ko ogkoiniatan nu ogpakabawi ka to kogang ku oyow ogkaawo ka igkaligsomi ku dio to tangkaan to mgo otow.”
bagunus
diunsun
ima
Ka soini no ignangon ku kaniu, tambag do; kono no igsugu ku to ogpangasawa kow.
Oggalaton ku pad poron kai to kanak oyow ogbuligan a pad no ogliwan koykow ko makatood ka poron no ogbulig kanak tagood to napirisu a no ogligkat to pog-alap-alap ku to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus.
Ko oggasa-an ka otow, oggatow ka pangkul din.
Nò, Igbuyag Agripa,” kagi ni Pablo, “Og–inso a koykow ko ogtuu ka to sikan no ingkasulat dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot? Natagaan ku to nigtuu kad ian to sikan no ingkasulat.”
Masakit so goinawa ku.
bialung
sagkop
simbal
Napolis ka to nig-untud to batang.
Ian su nataga kow to nounawa ka batasan noy to amoy no ogkohoy-u to anak din ka nig-os-osonan noy sikaniu, woy nigbuligan noy ka mgo goinawa now. Woy ungod noy nigtalosonan sikaniu oyow oglitos ka mgo batasan now to Magboboot, su sikandin ka ogsakup kaniu oyow ogkohimu kow on no suguanon din woy to oyow ogkatalaran kow on to karoyawon din.
bangkalow
ilian
Sikan ian, ko duon ogpokouma dio to kaniu no ogkounawa to sikan no mgo samuk now no litos no sikaniu ro ka ogboboot, manio to dio kow ogpohusoy to kono no duma ta to pogtuu?
tampod
No sikanta, ogmabulbuligoy ki to kohirapi to duma ta. No ligkat to sikan, ogpakatuman ki to sugu ni Kristu to ogpadakdakoloy ki to goinawa.
To napongan ni Hisus to nig-anad to sikan no mgo hibatoon din no sampulu woy darua, nighipanow on no nighondio to duma no marani no mgo lunsud oyow og-anad woy ogwali dio to mgo otow.
wà batasan
Di sikanta atag, ka langit ka tu-tuu ian no ugpaan tanow. No dakol ka pog-iman-iman ta to poglibong to Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow no si Hisu Kristu no ogligkat to langit su sikandin ka Talagpangabang kanta to mgo salo ta.
Sikan no otow ka ogpakatogkad to maralom.
kuyab
Kalogon ka sikan no mgo otow su mohirap lagboy ka iglogpad to Magboboot kandan uromo su og-unug sikandan to batasan dongan ni Kain no makasasalo. No ligkat to pogkoiniat dan to salapi, songo ogpokounug dod to nighimu ni Balaam dongan. No su songo og-atu sikandan to Magboboot no ogkoiling dod to nighimu woy ni Kuri dongan, ogkoumaan dod to kamatayon dan no songo ogkounawa rod to ingkalogpad woy ni Kuri.
Nò, sikaniu no kono no Hudiu no ogtuu on ki Hisus, doromdoma now ka dalan now nokani no waro kow pad nigtuu kandin. No ka mgo Hudiu no ogpatuli, nighingaranan dan sikaniu to mgo otow no kono no tinuli.
banoy1
Ko nagangu on ka pangamoton, bali ogpopoloran ka kamot.
Matuarong: Diò to kanami, ko dakol ka koirapi rin, layun ogpariralom to goinawa rin no konò din maga-an igsulì. Malayat ka ogkasabukan to goinawa rin.
urung
luyud
talià
Nò, nanlibuwas ka mgo Parisiu, to sika anaranan no nig-agpas nighondio no og-amut to mgo sakup ni Hirodis oyow ogbabantaan dan ko ogmonuon dan to ogpohimatoy ki Hisus.
songo
du-ung
Kagi ni Pablo to mgo otow to, “Pogkaponga, nig–uli a dio to Hirusalim no nighondio ad to Dakol no Ampuanan ta, no duon impapitow kanak no paatawan.
Sikan ian to waro agad hontow no ogpakaboli woy ko ogbaligya ko kono ogpapangotob to ngaran woy ko numiru no igpatokod to ngaran to sikan no nokohun-a no magintalunon no nigligkat to dagat.
Di ka lukos no duon on asawa, ogkatiglingoy to pog-ugpo dan to alunggun oyow ogkarago ka asawa rin
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, to soini ka innangon to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta to, “Og-awoson to ogluwat kow to mgo otow no og-ampu to mgo inotow-otow no kono kow on og-amut kandan. Woy kono now gongoni ka agad nokoy no ogpakaligsom to goinawa now. Ko sikan ka oghimuon now, ogkuwo on ku sikaniu.
banulaloy
Di ko kono kow ogtuu to kandin no insulat, ogmomonu kow naan no ogtuu to koddi no kagi?”
napù
sumpul
Agad nokoy no lugì, ko dakol ka ogkatagù on, ma-agul.
bantow
Ka pogkagi to Magboboot to sikan, marani on to songo gatus ka tuid ni Abraham no nataga rin to buyag on ian sikandin no, ko ligkat to kandin no lawa, konad on poron ogkohimu ko og-anak pad ka asawa rin. Woy songo nataga si Abraham to tahan do no kono ogkaboros ka asawa rin no si Sara. Di agad naan, waro masalin ka pogtuu ni Abraham tongod to ogbogayan sikandan to anak dan.
sakul
Og-awoson ta oyow maroyow ian tibo ka mgo batasan ta to oyow, ka mgo otow no kono ogtuu, ogpakatokod to maroyow ian ka oghimuon ta. Ian su agad ko duon mgo otow no ognangon to maroot ka oghimuon ta, di ogkatagaan dan dod to maroyow atag ka oghimuon ta. No uromo, ogkasayo dan ka Magboboot to allow no oglibong si Hisus no ogboboot to mgo otow kai to kalibutan.
Ko ogkamatoy ka otow, iglobong to tanò.
lunoy
otow
laghuy
Di duon sagboka ro no imbuyu dan kanami. No ian to oyow kono noy ogkalingawan to ogbulig to mgo otow no nigtuu no taga Hirusalim no noiluan to og-awoson dan. No ka sikan, tahan do kai to goinawa ku to ogtuman.
Sikan ian, ko ogdatong on sikandin dio to kaniu, karagoi now ka pog-uli din su duma tanow sikandin to pogtuu ta to Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow no si Hisu Kristu. Woy tahura now sikandin woy ka duma no mgo otow no ogkounawa kandin
sumpa
Kagi ni Hisus kuwo to mgo otow, “Malopot naan do ka pog-ugpo ku kai to kaniu no oghipanow ad dio to sikan no nigsugu koddi.
Si Sara no asawa ni Abraham dongan, songo unawa rod no nigpaagad-agad ki Abraham woy nighingaranan din si Abraham no igbuyag din. No kuntoon, sikaniu no mgo boi, ko og-unugon now ka maroyow no batasan ni Sara woy waro igkahallok now, ogkounawa kow rod to mgo anak din.
Mgo sulod noy to pogtuu, waro noy iholos kaniu no goinawa noy su indakoli noy sikaniu to goinawa.
bog-ang
Waro otow no ogkataga to pogdoromdom to dangob no otow su ian din do ogkatagaan ka kandin no goinawa. Songo ogkounawa rod ka Magboboot. Ka Gimukud din do ka ogpakasabut to tibo no pogdoromdom din.
Di dio pad ogpokougpo si Hisus to langit taman to ogkatuman on ka tibo no impanangon to Magboboot dongan to bo–bo to mgo maroyow no talagnangon to kagi rin.
Ogkohingaran to agpot kow kai to Pilipinas su sakup ka to songo ugpa-an.
Mohon-ing ka mgo otow no nigligkat to mohon-ing no mgo lunsud no dio dan malimud ki Hisus. Nigkagi si Hisus kandan to pananglitan. Kagi rin,
su ka Magboboot no mabogbog sikandin, dakol ka ingkohoy-u rin koddi. Matuwarong lagboy sikandin.”
Inbanggal ka manuk diò to tanò.
Piglunsod ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din no kagi rin kandan to, “Pamminog kow. Oghondio kinow to lunsud to Hirusalim no ko rio ki, ogkatuman ka ingkasulat dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot bahin koddi no Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan.
Mgo sulod, soini ka igkatatolu no pogpanumbaloy ku dio to kaniu. No doromdom kow to ingkasulat dongan to kinagian to Magboboot to, “Ko duon ogbayung, og-awoson to duon daruwa woy ko tatolu no ogpakamalogot to tu-tuu ian ka sikan no ignangon.”
Di to nigbayungan si Hisus to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy to mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu, waro sikandin nigtabak.
diù
dungus
Nigbunsud ni Hisus to og-anad to mgo otow no pinabayo to mgo pananglitan ka ig-anad din. Kagi rin, “Songo allow, duon ka sagboka no otow no nigpamulaan din ka tano din to songo lunsod no bunal no ogbogas no oghingaranan to ubas no nig-alad din on ka tibo. Nigtoungan din pad ka dakol no batu no litos to ogdiokan dan ka sikan no bogas no ubas Pogkaponga rin nigpohimu rin ka matikang no bakalag no nohimu to batu no unturanan to ogbantoy to sika pinamula rin. Ko naponga ka tibo, nigpasambayan din ka pinamula rin to mgo talagbantoy no nighow-as on sikandin dio to mariu no ugpaan.
alus
Kagi ran ki Hisus to, “Nangoni koy ko hondoi mogpuun ka katondanan nu to poghimu to soini no oghimuon nu woy og-insaan noy sikoykow ko hontow ka nigbogoy koykow to soini no katondanan?”
No nigpanangnangonoy pad sikandan tagood to ogmansolod sikandan to baloy. Pogsolod, nigkita ni Pedro ka mohon–ing no mgo otow no nalimud on.
Ko og-insaan kow to manio to oghokaron now, nangoni now to og-awoson to Igbuyag now di magaan din do ig-uli.”
pagis
Sikan ian no nig-agpas ian si Sakiu no namanoug. To pogkouma ran to baloy, narago si Sakiu no pinasolod din on si Hisus to baloy rin.
No ka tibo no mgo sundalu ran, ogkamatoy on su ligkat to sikan no balarow no malayat no oglibuwas dio to bo-bo to sikan no nig-untud to maputi no kuddo. Woy nigkokoon on to mgo manukmanuk ka mgo sapu dan.
bulung
Woy ko ogtuu now to Magboboot, ogbogayan kow to agad nokoy no ogbuyuon now to sikan no pog-ampu now.”
Pasaylua koy to mgo salo noy, unawa to ogpasayluon noy ka mgo salo to mgo duma noy kanami.
Pogkouma dan on dio to Samaria, nig–ampuan dan ka mgo nigtuu ki Hisus su oyow ogkabogayan on sikandan to Gimukud to Magboboot.
Ka otow no konò og-aguanta to talabau rin to oghilamon to homayan din, maga-an ogko-opos so doromdom din no ogkapogulan din on to oghiponga to oghilamon din.
Songo allow no ian Allow to mgo Hudiu to Oghimoloy, nighipanow si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din no nakabayo sikandan to kamot to tirigu. Pogbayo dan, nigpupu ka hibatoon ni Hisus to pila buwa no tagdoy to tirigu. Nigkusu ran ka lupogas oyow ogkaluitan woy nigkoon dan ka bogas no nakusu ran.
liwaswas
Pogkapawo, nighokaran on to igbuyag to sundalu ka karina no inhikot to bolad ni Pablo. Woy nighinggat din si Pablo dio to pinanlimud din no mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu, woy ka tibo no mgo pogbuyagon dan. No nigpatangko din on si Pablo kandan.
Du-on otow no ogholos no ogtu-uran din to oghinallok kanta oyow ogkaallok ki.
Nò, nigsasindog si Hisus no nigduma kandin. Songo nanduma ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus.
Dokad di, sikantanow atag no nigtuu, sagboka ro ka tu-tuu ian no Magboboot no ian Amoy ta. Sikandin ka ogligkatan to tibo woy sikandin dod ka oghimuan ta to tibo no oghimuon ta. Woy sagboka ro ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu. Sikandin ka pinohimu to tibo woy ligkat dod kandin, nabogayan kinow to iam no pogkouyag ta.
kò
Ka [sabandal, ian] igngaran to otow no warò batasan. Pangagikagi rò du-on to konò no maroyow.
iling
logoron
tomu
lo-ob
Kagi to duma no mgo Parisiu bahin ki Hisus, “Soin no lukos nò! Waro sugua to Magboboot su kono ogtuman to Balaod ta to kono ki ogtalabau ko Allow ta to Oghimoloy.” Di nigkagi ka mgo duma ran no kagi ran to, “Kono ogkohimu ka koin-inuan ko duon salo din.” No nabaad ka goinawa ran.
Tigbal a rò nigbulig.
Og-abinon ni Joaquin ka taga Maambago no sakup din.
Konò ka ogdagkot kanak su oghalinan ka to sakit ku
udling
bagu-bù
Si Lita, nignangon ki Mery to diò oghibat to kandin.
Nò, soini ka inso ku kaniu. Hontow ka nigbogoy to katondanan ni Huan to ogbautismuan din ka mgo otow dio to woig? Og-insa a ko rio to Magboboot woy ko dini to mgo otow?” Tabaka now. Nigpanaasnaasoy no nigmoin-insooy sikandan to, “Nokoy ka igtabak tanow? Ko ognangon kinow pa to, ‘Nigpuun to Magboboot,’ og-insaan kinow man do buwa nikandin to, ‘Manio naan no waro now tuui si Huan?’
Di nigtongtongan ni Hisus ka mgo otow no nig-inso din sikandan to, “Nokoy naan ka kalitukan to ingkasulat dongan to kagi to Magboboot? Soini ka impasulat din: ‘Ka sikan no batu no nig-ongkoran to mgo talaghimu to baloy, sikan ka nohimu nasi marigon lagboy no batu no igpounturan to baloy.’ ”
Po-utanga to mo-irob.
tubù
dungkò
Nokog-ampow-ampow on ka mgo salo din, no ian ogkounawaan ka katikang to langit. No kono ogkalingawan to Magboboot ka mgo pogkamaroot din.
Omunaan tuui now ka soini no malayag to duon pad kai sikandin kuntoon oyow ogkohimu kow no mgo otow no nabat-awan on ka goinawa now.” Ko napongan nigkagi si Hisus, nighipanow on no piglonusan din sikandan.
bagungan
Nò, nigparani ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din woy nigkagi kandan to, “Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu. Ka soin no publi no balu, dakoldakol ka kandin no in-ulug to soin no taguanan to salapi to nig-ulug to tibo no mgo otow.
Tabi-on ta ka duma ta.
ti-ow
To pogtupang dan dio to bubungan, nigsaparan ni Hisus sikandan to, “Kono now inangon ka soini no nigkita now dio to agad hontow otawa taman no koddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan ogkootawan a ligkat to kamatayon ku.”
Dio to lunsud to Sisaria, duon otow no kono no Hudiu no kapitan to songo sampangan no sundalu to taga Italia. Ka ngaran din no si Kornilio.
Di dongan, songo duon mgo ubaton no otow no ogkoiling to talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot di kono naan. No kuntoon, songo duon dod ubaton no mgo talag-anad no og-amut kaniu no igsolugsolug dan to ig-anad dan ka kono no tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon no ogpakaraat to pogtuu now. Lagkos to songo ognangonangon sikandan to kono no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta si Hisus. Di ian poron ogbalukas kandan. Sikan ian to ogkatokow sikandan to mohirap no iglogpad.
Mgo lukos no duon on asawa, dakoli now to goinawa ka asawa now, woy kono now ogdoogdooga sikandan.
Kagi ni Kornilio to, “Tatolu on no allow ka nigligad no tigbal do no ogkounawa kuntoon to alas tris to mahapun, no nig–ampu a kai to baloy ku su ogtumanon ku ka pog–ampu ta. Inogo on no duon otow no malayag ka sabinit din no nigsasindog to tangkaan ku.
Duon dangob no pananglitan ni Hisus no innangon din to mgo otow. Kagi rin, “Og-inso a kaniu ko litos ko ogpakitkitooy ka olin nabutud? Kono su sikandan no darua, ogkoulug dio to kanal.
Pignangonan ni Hisus ka kapitan to, “Uli kad on. Tongod to nigtuu kad on koddi, ogkatuman ka pogpabuyu nud koddi.” To sikan lagboy no oras noulian ka sikan no suguanon to kapitan.
ilas
takdang
Ka nalibulung no mgo otow ka nigtabak. Kagi ran, “Pigsoloran ka to busow. Hontow naan ka oghimatoy koykow porom?”
Kagi to sikan no boi, “Buyag, ogpakasabut ad on to duon katagaanan nu no talagnangon ka to kagi to Magboboot.”
No-ubatan ka goinawa nu to pogsalig now.
pantow
tibug
Ogbuyu koy kaniu to oyow kono kow ogkatalap woy to oyow kono kow ogkasasow ko duon ogdinogon now no nangnangonon no ogligkat to otow no nahan dan no nokouma on ka allow to poglibong to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta kai to soini no tano. Agad ko oghonduonon dan to, ka sikan no ignangonnangon dan, nigligkat to lagsoban, woy ko ligkat to kagi noy woy ko sulat noy, kono kow ogkasasow.
pad
No, si Hudas no ian ka ogpanabod ki Hisus, nig-inso to, “Maistru, kono buwa no sikoddi ka ogpanabod koykow?” Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Sikoykow ian ka ognangon.”
Di ka mgo Parisiu woy ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod, nigmugongmugong kandan bahin ki Hisus no kagi ran to, “Amana soini no otow no ogsagman to mgo makasasalo no mgo otow woy songo og-amut kandan ko ogkokoon.”
takubung
sakub
Konò no mongo duma ta no nanhondini kanta.
Ka bulbul dan, ogkoiling to bulbul to boi. No ka mgo ngipon dan, ogkoiling to ngipon to liun.
Nò, kono kid ogdumaruma to sikan no mgo otow.
tanlad
No su ogbuligan a ni Hisu Kristu, ogkaragaan ku ka pogtuman ku to soini no igpohimu to Magboboot kanak.
Woy songo nigpamilikpilikan ni Moisis ka ampuanan no nohimu to manggad woy ka tibo no kalaglagan to pogsimba ran.
Ian su si Hisus ka ogpakatuman to tibo no innangon to Magboboot kanta. Sikan ian to ogpakamalogot ki to tu-tuu ian ka innangon din woy ogpakakagi ki to “Hoo.” No ligkat to sikan, ogkasayo sikandin.
“Nignangonan kow to soini oyow duon maroyow no goinawa now pinabayo to pogkasagboka kow ro koddi. Ogbaybayaran kow to mgo otow no wa nigtuu kai to soin no kalibutan. Di kono kow ogkahallok su naroog kud ka tibo no maroot kai to soin no kalibutan.”
Ma-alas ka bogas to katumbal ko ogkoinug.
unoy
Pogkita ni Hisus kandan, kagi rin to, “Hondio kow on to mgo talagpanubad to Magboboot to oyow ogpitawon dan ka lawa now ko warad ka kogang now.” Nò, nighipanow on sikandan no to dio to dalan, natibo on nabawian to mgo kogang dan.
Nigdulug a ki amò to poghibat.
panayawan
Omunaan og-awoson to songo oghogoton now ka pogtuu now su ka Amoy ta no dio to langit songo hogot ian ka pogdoromdom din kanta.
mayyaman
pantad
Nò, su waro otow ogpakaligal to sikan, og–awoson no oghagtong kow on ka ogsasamuk woy tantanuri now ka goinawa now oyow kono kow ogpakasalo to balaod ta.” kagi.
“Woy malasi ku logpari ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no nigsolod dio to agad hondoi no anaranan to mgo Hudiu su ogpogoson ku poron to ogdoot ki Hisus. Lagboy ad on ian ogkalanglangotan kandan nokani. Woy songo nighondio ad to mariu no mgo ugpaan to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu oyow ogkabaybayaran ku ka nigtuu ki Hisus.
Niglansang dan ka darua no tulisan dio to mgo krus no pinoglimang ki Hisus sikandan.
“Di duon nigtitigus koddi no labow pad to innangon ni Huan. Ka igpohimu koddi to Amoy ku, ian ogtitigus koddi to pigsugu a to Amoy ku no Magboboot.
Ka dangob pad no pananglitan ni Hisus. Kagi, “Agad ko hontow no ogpanakow, woy ogpakasolod to baloy to manokal no lukos no ogtakow to kalaglagan din ko ogbakuon din pad ka sikan no tagtuun no manokal. Bali naan ogtakawon din on ka agad nokoy.
balugu
Batu ka ogkatkaton to dalan.
tambas
Ko du-on otow no ogpanumbaloy no ligkat to Kapalong, ogpatomu kanta diò to babalakan oyow ogpoko-untul to baloy ta oyow konò ogkalagaklagak.
maistra
Ko nigpamogsoy to marani to hon-om no kilumitru ka mgo hibatoon din, nigkita ran si Hisus no oghihipanow dio to laplap to woig no ogmarani on dio to balutu ran. Nò, nahallok lagboy sikandan.
Nokoy so-ini no otow no lukuluku? Mulò dò no og-alakansion ki.
ongo aslag.
Sulod, maroyow ka batasan nu to mgo duma ta to pogtuu su agad to waro nu pad matilala, maroyow man ka pogsagman nu kandan.
makopal
Nò, nig-uli on ka mgo talagbantoy to karniru no nigsasayo sikandan to Magboboot to mgo kanta ran. Ian to ogsayoon dan su narago ian to tibo no nigdinog dan woy tibo no nakitaan dan no unawa to innangon to diwata kandan.
Nò, su sikan ka nighimu to mgo otow, nigbalagad on to Magboboot ko nokoy ka ogkoiniatan dan no maroot no ogtumanon dan no litos poron no igkasipod dan. Duon mgo boi no nigbalbalawan dan on ka batasan dan poron to mgo lukos no nigmool-olinoy on ka mgo boi no ogmohulhuliroy.
Nò,” kagi ni Hisus, “Oghipanow pad ka busow no og-angayon din pad ka papitu no busow no madmaroot pad kandin. Nò, oglibongan dan ka otow no noulian on, no ogsolod on ka tibo. Madmaroot pad lagboy ka pog-ugpo to sikan no otow to nokohun-a no pog-ugpo din.” Ian ka kagi ni Hisus.
Di nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Duon pogkoon ku no wa now matagoi.”
Natalogonan a su du-on magaliug ku no nigdatong kanak. Ka talabau ku, warò ku pad mapongoi su warò liwak. Ogka-aloy to magaliug ku.
Di nigduung ka mgo loin no balutu no ogligkat to Tibirias to sikan no masolom. Nigduung dio to marani to pigkoonan to nalibulung no mgo otow no nigkoon to paan no nigpasalamatan ni Hisus
piak
Ogkoiniat porom ni Pablo to og–amut dio to sikan no nalimud no mgo otow dio to limuranan dan. Di waro ibogoy to mgo nigtuu.
Os-os on ka woig.
Pogkalugoy no waro pigkoon ka mgo otow dio to barku su nasasow, no nigsasindog on si Pablo no kagi rin to, “Mgo sulod, maroyow porom ko nigpamminog kow pa kanak an–anayan su dio ki ro porom nigtagad to pulu to Krita. Waro ki porom mabaybayari woy songo waro porom maraat kuntoon ka mgo kalaglagan.
Nigligkat koy on ka nigsakoy to barku no noongkoran noy ro ka mgo otow no nig–alagad kanami. No nigparagas ka pogsakoy noy no nigduung koy on to pulu to Kus. Mapawo, nokouma koy on to pulu to Rudas no nigparagas koy no oghondio to lunsud to Patara.
galang
Dio namatoy si Hakub. Woy pogkalugoy, songo nammatoy on ka mgo anak din no ian mgo kaap–apuan ta,” kagi ni Istiban.
Kono ki ogkoiling to duma no oghagtonghagtong to poglimudlimud dan no og-ampu. Di sikanta atag, oglimudlimud ki nasi oyow ogmoos-osonoy ki su nataga ki to magaan on ogkatuman ka allow to poglibong ni Hisus to soini no tano.
Nò, ka sikan no mgo Parisiu, mgo talag-anad to Balaod dan, pig-inso dan si Hisus to, “Manio to kono og-unug ka koykow no mgo hibatoon ka in-anad to kabuybuyagan ta? Ogkokoon ka hibatoon nu no waro hugasi ka bolad dan bahin to batasan ta.”
Igtalò nu ka laku.
Nigtabak sikandan no kagi ran, “Ko waro salo to soin no otow, wa noy alapa kai to koykow.”
kunto-on
Ian su sikandin no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, ogpoholughulug on ligkat to Langit no og-angoy to mgo otow no nigtuu on kandin. No duon ogdinogon ta no ogbabansagon no ogsugu woy duon diwata no igbuyag to duma no diwata to Magboboot no og-umow. Woy duon dod ogdinogon ta no daging no ogkoiling to bungag to Magboboot. No ka sikan no mgo otow no nigtuu ki Kristu no nighun-a nammatoy, ogkouyag on no oghun-a.
Kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Pamminog kow. Ko ogsolod kow dio to lunsud, ogpakatagbu kow to sagboka no lukos no ogtiang to kuron no sakaru rin. Sundulsundul kow kandin dio to baloy no ogsoloran din
Ian to nataga ran su nigdinog dan to nigkakagi woy si Kornilio to mgo kinagian no waro dan masabuti, woy nigdinog to ogsayoon dan ka Magboboot.
Ian su duon mgo otow no nakasuwoy to sikan no in-anad noy no ogmaal-alukuyoy on to waro pulus.
nanoy
Ka otow no oggopas, ogbokas to usig ka ogpilak.
lintok
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin, “Malogot ka soini no ogkagion ku kaniu. Kono no si Moisis ka ogligkatan to sikan no kalasi no paan. Ian ka ogligkatan ka Magboboot no Amoy ku. Agad kuntoon, ka Amoy ku ian ka ogbogoy to malogot no igkouyag ta no ogligkat dio to kandin.
pakow
Ko konò ogkahalin ka goinawa nu diò to duma no boi, no ian nu ogbatukon ka sikan no boi no nasabutan nu.
“Songo duon in-anad dongan to kaap-apuan tanow no ko duon lukos no og-ongkod to asawa din, awoson no ogbogoy ka lukos dut asawa rin to sulat to og-ongkod kandin.
Ka sikan, ogkatu-on to ogkalasikalasi no ngalap.
dakol
Di kuntoon, duon on dalan no impohitaga to Magboboot kantanow to oyow ogkohimu kinow on no maroyow dio to tangkaan din. Di ka ogpakamaroyow kanta, kono ogligkat to pogtuman ta poron to dongan no Balaod ni Moisis. Di ka sikan no dalan no imbogoy to Magboboot, igpamalogot dod to sikan no Balaod woy to mgo talagnangon to kinagian din dongan.
Natugku si Binita
Du-on kinabò ku no makopal. Ko du-on otow no ogbuyù di konò ku igbogoy su ogkannugun ki to ogbogoy su mahal lagboy to pogboli ku.
Ka mgo otow no oglayun ogpaagad-agad to mgo maroot no koiniatan to lawa ran, ungod dan ogdoromdomon ka sikan no mgo koiniatan dan no ogkalogparan on sikandan to kamatayon dan no waro katamanan. Di ka mgo otow no og-ungod ogpaagad-agad to Magboboot, ungod dan ogdoromdomon ka igkoiniat to Gimukud din, no ogmaawang on ka goinawa ran dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, woy ogkabui sikandan to waro katamanan.
Songo nigsokod din ka alad to sikan no lunsud. No ka sokod din, kohon-oman no mitrus. No ka pogsokod din, nig-un-unawa to sikan no tahan no igsokod to mgo otow.
Ka alag, maporos ko ogsopo-on ta. Igpatigpok to langosa ko du-on ogkapali-an.
Nò, ko duon igkabogoy nu to mgo otow no publi, awoson no kono nu pasagmana ka oghimuon nu su sikan ian ka oghimuon to mgo otow no ogpatuutuu ka pogtuu ran dio to mgo anaranan to mgo og-ampu woy dio to mgo dalan oyow ogsayoon sikandan to mgo otow. Kono now kalingawi soini. To nigsayo on sikandan to mgo otow, sikan do ian ka igsayo kandan; wa duma no igsayo kandan.
pangkok
Omunaan sikaniu no mgo sakup to Magboboot no ogpaagad-agad to mgo sugu din woy ogtuu to kinagian ni Hisus, awoson now to og-aguantoon now ka igkabaybayari now no kono kow ogloko to pogtuu now to Magboboot.
Tatolu no bulan ka ig–ugpo noy dio to Malta no nigsakoy koy on to barku no nigligkat to Alihandria no nigpatilo–to pad dio to Malta. No dio to dulung to barku duon inotow no oghingaranan dan to Sosoping.
Nò, su sikan ian ka og-im-imanan noy, kono koy ogkasipod to ognangonnangon to kinagian to Magboboot.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ogligkat ian to kabogbogan to Magboboot ka igdogil ku to mgo busow. Noumaan kow on man to tumanon to Magboboot to Pogsugu din.”
Nabagbag on ka songo lobut no bulu no naro-ogan to kayu no lopuk.
Si Abraham ka amoy ni Isaak. Si Isaak, amoy ni Hakub. Si Hakub amoy ni Huda woy to mgo sulod din.
Ka otow no konò ogka-ali-a ka kandin no goinawa, mangkuan konò ogka-ali-a ka kandin no goinawa.
Mgo sulod, ogkoiniatan ku lagboy to oyow ka mgo duma ku no Hudiu, ogkapangabangan to logpad to Magboboot, no ungod a og-ampu kandin tongod to sikan ian.
“Ka igkarua no suguanon din no nokouma, nignangon to, ‘Buyag, nig-anak to lalimma ka ingalat nu koddi.’
diò
Duon dod dangob no kagi rin. Kagi, “Ogsaligan ku ka Magboboot.” Woy duon man do dangob no kagi rin. Kagi, “Soini a rod ka nigduma to mgo anak nu no insalig nu kanak.”
pogul
No ko duon otow no ogkarago, ogdalong ki to igkarago dan, di ko duon otow no ogpakasinogow, songo ogdalong ki to igkasinogow ran.
Wà pad matapid
Nò, nighipanow on ka sikan so darua no hibatoon din no ko nokouma dio to lunsud, nigkita ran ka songo nati duon to ilis to dalan no nohikotan no marani to gumawan to songo baloy. Poghokad dan to hikot,
Koddi ian ka nigsulat to tibo soini no nakakita a man to insulat kud. Agad nataga koy dii to malogot ka soin no insulat kud.
Ka otow no ogkalasinglasing, ogkabannoy on ka oghipanow no ogkapolodpolod on ka ogtakang.
Ko nokogtagbu koy to tikù no dalan, nokogtokow koy. Nokogdongan koy to nigkagi to, "Otow"!
togtog
Omunaan ka nigpakimatoy si Hisu Kristu woy to nouyag on su oyow ogkohimu on sikandin no Lagboy no Igbuyag to tibo no otow no ogtuu, ko ogkabui pad kai to tano woy ko namatoy on.
sampulù
salimotang
langoy
tompug
Nataga a to mgo igkabaybayari now no ogligkat to pogtuu now kanak. Woy nataga a to noil-iluan kow on to og-awoson to pog-ugpo now kai to tano. Dokad di, nohimu kow on no datu dio to langit. Woy nataga a rod to ogsumpalitan kow to mgo Hudiu no og-abin no mgo sakup sikandan to Magboboot. Dokad di to kono no tu-tuu ian no Hudiu sikandan su mgo sakup naan sikandan ni Satanas.
Ka dalik, ian ka ogpokog-akob-akob no tagu-an to tonob woy ka burun to mgo patiukan.
buyag
tutung
halit
Di nigtabak ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus to, “Ah Marta, nasasow ka bag to mohon-ing ka oghimuon nu.
Di ogpokouma rod ka Allow no ogdaaton to Magboboot ka soini no kalibutan No ian ogkounawa to pogkouma to talagpanakow su ogkatokow on ian ka mgo otow. No to sikan no allow, duon ogkarinog no maagbot no ogkokonolung no ogkoubus on no ogkaawo ka langit. No ka tano woy ka kalaglagan kai, woy ka mgo hinimuan to mgo otow, ogkasilaban no ka tano, ogkatunow on to hapuy.
kusuv
Ko pila noy on no allow noy dio to Sisaria, duon otow no ogngaranan ki Agabu no nighondio to kanami ligkat to Hudia. Talagnangon sikandin to kinagian to Magboboot.
napù
Di nigbogayan to Magboboot ka boi to dakol no pakpak to kuligi to oyow ogpakalayang sikandin dio to holholawan no ogtamongan sikandin to Magboboot taman to tatolu woy tonga no tuid oyow kono ogkoumaan sikandin to sikan no dakol no ulod.
magù
Woy songo ogkohimu rod poron ko duon asawa ku no songo ogtuu no ogdumoon ku no ogkounawa ki Pedro woy ka duma no mgo suguanon woy ka mgo hari to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.
kuò
Ko pinabayo to sagboka no bolad nu woy ko ka paa nu no og-ongkoran nu ka pogtuu nu to Magboboot, tampori nu sikan woy igdogpak nu. Madmaroyow pad no natamporan ka bolad nu woy ko paa nu di ogbogayan ka to kouyagan no waro katamanan to duon darua no bolad nu woy ko darua no paa nu di igdogpak ka dio to hapuy no kono ogkaparongan taman to taman.
Poggoram ni Pedro to maagbot no kalamag, nahallok sikandin no nigbunsud no nalonod porom sikandin. No nig-ulaloy sikandin no kagi rin, “Buyag, pangabangi a bag.”
nigsolod on sikandan, di waro dan nakitoi ka lawa ni Hisus.
Agad pad hondo-i no tana-a no ogko-utolan din to babuy no og-antuson din to’gbaba.
“No nigbuyu ku poron ka mgo hibatoon nu to ogdogilon dan poron ka busow, di kono ogpakarogil sikandan.”
No ka tano no dugion no nasawaran to boni, ian ogkounawaan ka otow no ogdinog to kagi to Magboboot di pogkalugoy, ogkatalantan to mgo igkasasow ran, mgo kalaglagan dan, mgo igkarago dan. Unawa to homoy no naliboran on dut dugion no konad ogpakalibuwas ka bogas din, songo kono ogpakatood ka pogtuu to sikan no mgo otow.
untung
silib
“Kuntoon, alam ka to mgo otow no ogsuguon nu dio to Hupi su oyow ogkaangoy ran si Simon no ian angga din, si Pedro.
No songo duon mgo taga Krita woy mgo taga Arabia. Mohon–ing ka pigligkatan ta no nigloinloin ka mgo ugpaan ta, di ogdinogon ta sikandan no ognangonnangon kanta to mgo kabolongbolonganan no nohimu to Magboboot. No ian kinagian dan to ognangon, ka mgo kinagian ta no ogloinloin.
Kono no litos no ogbootan ta ka suguanon to songo otow to kono no litos ka oghimuon din, su ka igbuyag din do ka ogpakanangon ko litos ka oghimuon din woy ko kono. Songo ogkounawa rod kanta. Kono no litos ko sikanta ka ogboboot tongod to dangob no otow no ogtuu ki Hisus, ko litos sikandin dio to tangkaan to Magboboot. Ogkohimu sikandin no litos dio to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta su ogbulig ka Magboboot kandin.
Sikan ian, ka soini no in-anad ku kaniu, igbulig now to goinawa to mgo duma now.
singkatul
To nigpamminog ka mgo otow to kagi rin, nigparagas si Hisus no nignangonnangon kandan to songo pananglitan. Sikan ka soini no pananglitan din su marani on sikandan to lunsud to Hirusalim woy su nahan to mgo otow no magaan on ogdatong ka Pogsugu to Magboboot dio to kandan.
Di nigbabansagonon si Pablo to, “Kono nu hisakiti ka lawa nu. Natibo koy rod soini.”
Du-on otow no mananoy ogko-opuk ka ogsonob to woig no ogtogkad sikandin to maralom no linow.
Nokoy ka pulus ko ogkapurut din ka tibo no karatui to soin no tano ko ian ogkaawo to kouyagan din dio to Magboboot. Waro man pulus su waro litos no igsaliu ta to kouyagan ta dio to Magboboot.”
obol
panggo-at
Ogkounawa to sikan ko ogpokouma uromo ka mohuri no allow kai to soin no kalibutan. Ka mgo diwata no suguanon to Magboboot, oglunsoron dan ka maroot no mgo otow no nakaamut dio to mgo otow no matuwarong.
sugkal
Moon-ing ka nabawi-an ni Hisus.
tuil
kamot
Ogdamag ka, ogduma ka masakit to goinawa nu, sinogow, pandawot woy ogkalangò.
Duon dod ka mgo boi di mariu pad to krus. Duon si Maria no taga Magdala woy si Salomi woy si Maria no inoy ni Husi woy si Santiago no hari rin.
Du-on otow no inbogoy rin on ka salu-al din to songo otow su nigsokol on to hawak no konad no litos din.
liag
ugsul
ulayan
Pogkita rin, nigduma din dio to Antiokia. Dio mog–ugpo sikandan taman to songo tuid, no nigdumaruma to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus. Woy mohon–ing ka mgo otow no pig–anad dan. Ka sikan no mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus no dio to Antiokia, sikandan ka an–anayan no mgo otow no pighingaranan to mgo sakup ni Kristu.
Kuntoon, Igbuyag noy no dio to Langit, doromdoma nu ka mgo impasait to soini no mgo igbuyag noy. Woy buligi koy ro ka mgo suguanon nu oyow kono koy ogkahallok to ognangonnangon to kinagian nu.
Nigtabak si Hisus to pananglitan. Kagi rin, “Duon darua no otow no nakasamboy to salapi to songo datu. Ka sagboka, nigsamboy to lalimma no gatus. Ka dangob, kalimmaan do ka nigsambayan din.
oghondio pad sikandin to mgo duma rin. Ogpangumow to duma rin no papitu no mgo busow no madmaroot pad lagboy kandin. Nò, ogdumoon din sikandan no oglibongan din ka sika otow no noulian on no ogsolod on ka tibo. Madmaroot pad lagboy ka pog-ugpo to sikan no otow to nokohun-a no pog-ugpo din. Ogkounawa sikan ka pog-ugpo to mgo otow no maroot so batasan dan no ogkootawan kuntoon, nasi ogmaroot man do ka batasan dan.”
ugsob
Di nabaghot nasi to mgo otow to ogkagi to, “Ogsamukon din ogsasawon ka mgo otow to ig-anad din dio to agad hondoi to soini no Probinsia to Hudia. Dio nigbunsud nignangonnangon to mgo otow no taga Galilia taman to kaid on ian to kanta no ugpaan.”
liling
Ian ligkatan to igdakoli ta ka Magboboot woy ka duma ta su ka Magboboot ka nighun-a indakoli kanta to goinawa.
baguguy
Ka malayat no otow, matangkawal.
Sikanta mgo sulod, nig-abin kid on to Magboboot oyow kono kid on ogkouripon to sikan no Balaod. Di ka sikan og-awoson to kono ighimu no dalan to igpabulung to maroot no igkoibog to lawa ta. Di og-awoson atag to ogmabulbuligoy kinow no ogligkat to ogmadakdakoloy ki to goinawa.
Nò, su uromo, tibo soini ogkoubus ogkaawo, og-awoson to og-ay-ayaran ta to og-unug to batasan no oglitos to Magboboot Woy og-awoson to waro maroot no tagu to goinawa ta.
layag
Soini, Timoteo, ka igsugu ku koykow no anak ku to pogtuu no ogkaayun to sikan no impanangon to Magboboot nokani tongod koykow, su sikan ka igmanokal to goinawa nu kuntoon oyow maroyow ka pog-atu nu to agad nokoy no ogpakaatang to tu-tuu ian no pogtuu ta.
Ko ogkapongaan to poghimu to darua no allow, bali ogkako-on ka sikan no agkud.
matoy
Ka ig-anad noy, kono ogligkat to katouanan to mgo otow, di ogligkat to igpasabut to Gimukud to Magboboot kanta, no songo igpasabut noy to mgo otow no ogbootan to Gimukud din.
Tibo kaniu, ko oglimudlimud kow, ipohitaga now ka dakol no goinawa now no ogmakumkumustooy kow. Tibo no mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisu Kristu no dio to duma no mgo lunsud, ogpapangumusta kaniu.
Pogkalugoy, duon songo luti no tano no naboli to salapi no imbogoy to mgo otow ki Hudas, ka imbayad to maroot no nohimu rin no impanabod din si Hisus. Di nighondio si Hudas to matikang no dalama no nig–ogot to lawa rin. Nabalbalintuad sikandin no naladlaran on ka gotok din no nanlopow on ka bituka rin no namatoy on.
litig
Duon dod mgo otow no ogkabigtawan on ligkat to igkahallok dan woy to ogkasumansuman dan ko ogkoomonu on buwa ka soini no tano su agad ka mgo bituon dio to langit, ogsuwoy to tahan no ogbayaan dan.
Ka dangob pad. Woy ogkoon to nigbolion dan dio to palingki ko oghugasan dan on to kandan no batasan. Songo ogtumanon dan ka mohon-ing no batasan to kabuybuyagan dan no ogkounawa to kandan no batasan to oghugas to mgo basu ran mgo kandiru, woy ka mgo boung no boronsi.
Soini ka lituk to impananglitan ku. Ka boni no insawod to sikan no og-orok, sikan ka kagi to Magboboot bahin to Pandatuan din.
No ogkaroromdom nu to, ligkat to bato ka pad, nakasabut kad to sikan no kinagian to Magboboot no impasulat din dongan no ogpakabogoy to pogkasabuti ta oyow ogkapangabangan kinow to salo ta ligkat to ogtuu kid on ki Hisu Kristu.
bu-ol
Sikan ian mgo sulod to pogtuu, su ligkat to langosa ni Hisus to pogpakimatoy rin kanta, waro igduwaruwa ta to ogsolod kinow to sikan no Kinaroyawan no Ampuanan no dio to Magboboot.
Ian su duon impasulat to Magboboot to tibo din imparoog ki Hisu Kristu. Di ko nigkagi to, “Tibo nigparoog,” ogkasabutan ta to waro ilagkos ka Magboboot no ogparoog.
Sikan ian no nigmalayaton ni Hirodis ka pog-insoinso din ki Hisus di waro nigtabak si Hisus.
“To nokouma on ka allow to pagkoonan din, pigsugu din ka suguonon din oyow ognangonan ka mgo otow no pigtugunan to, ‘Hondio kow on to baloy su nalutu on ka koonon.’
kalimun
Nò, ka ngaran to igbuyag to sikan no pulu to Malta, si Publiu. No duon tano din no ogmarani ro to sikan no dampotan noy. Nigpasolod koy dio to baloy rin no nigpakoon koy on. No dio koy mog–ugpo kandin to tatolu no allow.
Sikan ian, ligkat to allow no nanangonan koy tongod kaniu, ungod noy ampui sikaniu. Ogbuyu koy to Gimukud to Magboboot oyow ogkabogayan kow rin to dakol no katouanan now woy ka pogkasabuti now oyow ogkatagaan now lagboy ka tibo no ogkoiniatan din no igpohimu rin kaniu.
nanoy
Ian su ka mgo batasan no ogligkat to soini no kalibutan, unawa to mgo maroot no ogkoiniatan to lawa ta, mgo koiniatan no ogpitawon to mata ta no kono no litos, woy ka pogkoiniat no igparakol to kanta no ngaran, kono ogligkat to Amoy ta no dio to Langit su ogligkat atag kai to kalibutan.
Ig-agpas nu ighatod. Igpamaga-an ta igpahatod.
so-om
Sikan ian ka igtabak ku ko og-insaan a ko tu-tuu ian to suguanon a rin.
hoy-u
Nò, su mananoy nighagtong ka bagyu no pila on no allow no waro noy kitaa ka allow woy mgo bituon, warad imanan noy to ogkapangabangan koy pad.
Soin no oghingaran to Kagi, nigpootow woy nig-ugpo kai to kanta to soin no kalibutan. Ogkoy-u lagboy sikandin woy malogot do ian ka kandin no ogpangagion. Nigkita noy ka karayawi rin no ka ogligkatan to sika karayawi ka Magboboot su kandin ka bugtung no Anak to Magboboot.
Natuluy ka dangob no kayu
Katitigus ka woig
bukun
Nigtabak ka amoy rin mgo inoy rin to, “Nataga koy man to soini ka anak noy woy to nabutud ligkat to pogkootow rin.
digus
so-ob
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to, “Soini ka ignangon ku kaniu no ogpamminog koddi. Dakola now ka goinawa now to mgo usig now. Buligi now ka mgo otow no ogpangusig kaniu.
su ka otow ka ogbogayan din. Ian su duon impasulat dongan to Magboboot. No kagi to sulat to, “Manio, Magboboot, to ogdoromdomon nu ka otow? Woy manio to ogsagmanon nu sikandin?
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Koy-u kaniu porom no mgo taga Korasin woy taga Bitsaida. Su mohon-ing ka nigkita now no kabogbogan to nigbawian kud ka mgo otow to mgo masakit dan dio to mgo lunsud now di wa kow mogtuu koddi. Ka soini pa no nigkita now, ko nohimu pa dongan dio to lunsud to Tiru woy Sidon, magaan dan porom og-ongkori ka maroot no batasan dan no nigsasabinit on porom sikandan to manggad no nohimu to saku woy igsabuk dan to ulu ran ka atibung to abu no ian maganangon to nigsonditan dan on to mgo salo dan no nig-ongkoran dan on ka mgo maroot no batasan dan.”
Dokad di ko duon otow no ogtuu on to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, ogkaawo on ka sikan no ogpakaatang to doromdom dan.
dugu-an
bo-bò
Ko ogkabokas on ka bagwanan to balatik, du-on on ogsagad no babuy.
Sikan ian, ka Balaod ni Moisis, noiling to talagbantoy kanta taman to nokouma on si Kristu to oyow ogkohimu kinow on no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot no ogligkat to pogtuu ta ki Hisu Kristu.
Nokani no waro kow pad mataga to tu-tuu ian no Magboboot, nouripon kow pad to sikan no mgo nig-ampuan now no kono no tu-tuu ian no magboboot.
Sikan ian ka niglimudlimud koy on kai to Hirusalim. No nigmaroyow ka goinawa noy tibo to og–alam koy to mgo otow no ogpohondioon noy to kaniu no ogduma ki Pablo daruwa ki Birnabi no indakoli noy to goinawa.
Sikan ian, ko pananglitan oglimudlimud to og-ampu ka tibo no mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisus, no ka tibo ogkakagi ro duon to sikan no mgo loinloin no kinagian, mangkuwan duon buwa oglopow no duma no mgo otow no waro pad maanad to sikan no batasan, woy ko ka waro nigtuu. Ko ian dan do ogdinogon ka sikan no mgo loinloin no mgo kinagian, ogpakanangon buwa to nallangog kow ro duon.
Waro otow no nigkita to Magboboot, di ko ogparakdakoloy ki to goinawa ta, ogdumaruma ka Magboboot kanta no ka dakol no goinawa rin to mgo otow, songo ogkatibulus on kai to kanta no goinawa.
Oggabà ka kalayag.
Igsabuk ku sikaniu to pubri tongod to warò a nu ay-ayari.
hop-at
Di magaan ad on og-uli dio to sikan no nigsugu koddi. Di agad sagboka kaniu, waro kow mog-inso ko hondoi a ogdolog!
Nò, duon nabantug no otow no napirisu. Ka ngaran din ian si Barabas.
no kagii now ka tagbanwa to, ‘Anggam, ogpoinsoon to Maistru ko hondoi longod ka sinabong no nig-indanan kud no litos to magaliug? Dutun a woy ka mgo hibatoon ku oglabung to soin no Pagkoonan to Paligad.’ No kagi ni Hisus,
Nò, sikan so ogpanabod, tahan on nignangon din kandan ko nokoy ka indanan oyow ogtokoron dan si Hisus. Kagi rin, “Ka ogharokan ku, sikan ian sikandin. Dakopa now sikandin woy bantayi now ko og-alapon now.”
Doydoyawa nu ka batasan nu woy ka pog-anad nu, no noknokali nu to oghimu su, ko ogtumanon nu, sikoykow woy ka og-anaron nu, ogkabogayan to kouyagan no waro kataman.
Ogkounawa kow ro to nabbutud no mgo otow no nigkitkit to songo nabutud. Ogtumanon now ka mgo mallintok no mgo sugu no ogkounawa to og-awoon now ka songo higtok no duon to inumon now, di kono now ogtumanon ka dakol lagboy no mgo sugu.
langò
boi
No kagi ni Pedro to, “Duon a pad to kabinunsuran to ignangonnangon ku woy ki Kornilio, no nigbogayan on sikandan to Gimukud to Magboboot, un–unawa kanta no songo nigbogayan kid on an–anayan.
Ogpanuktuk ka lumansad ko og-ulingolon ta ka piak dan
soluk
dugi
walong
Konò ogka-ayun ka sikan no "anad" su ... ligkat to og-atu.
“No, duon Hudiu no talagpanubad to Magboboot no nakabayo to sikan no napalian no songo Hudiu. Di to nigkita rin ka otow no napalian, niglipasan din do. Dio to limang to dalan nigbayo.”
liang
Talagtomu ka limukon.
Noinuinu si Natanial no nigkagi sikandin. Kagi rin, “Manio to ogtokoron a nu?” Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin, “Ko dio ka pad to lobut to kayu no igira no ogholong ka pad no waro ka pad umawa ni Pilipi, nigkita kud sikoykow.”
dua
Ko ogtuturan ta ka manukmanuk, no ko ogkabantang tad, ogpabotu-on ka pusil no dibumba no ogkasugat on.
Ko oglapas ki to malogos no woig, ogpakapanigkaddal ki ka oglapas su ogko-usung ki su mabolbol.
Sikan ian,” kagi ni Hisus, “ka ignangon ku kaniu, agad hontow, ko kono kow ogpokoongkod to agad nokoy no katiglingoy now no kalaglagan, mgo dangob no igkoiniat now, kono kow ogkoimu no hibatoon ku.”
Woy ogtokoron now on ka malogot no ka kamalogotan, ian ogbogoy kaniu to kalipuasan.”
soysoy
Songo ogkounawa rod ka dilo ta su agad malintok di dakol ka igparakoldakol din. Ka dilo ta, ian tad ogkounawaan ka malintok do no hapuy no ogpakasilab to maluag no koilawan.
Warò og-ogot koykow su nigbo-otan ku to nig-andal.
Tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus, lagboy on ian no nanahallok. Woy agad hontow no nakarinog to nabayaan to sikan no daruwa, songo nanahallok on.
Ko dominggu on, nalimud on ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus su oyow ogkokoon koy to harina no waro amuti to igpatulin. No si Pablo, nignangonnangon kanami tongod ki Hisus su pogkapawo, oghipanow on. Sikan ian to nigparagas to pognangonnangon din taman to liwaro on to kausiloman.
Dokad di songo waro nig-unawa ka kandan no innangon.
No nig–ampu pad sikandan. Kagi ran to, “Buyag noy no dio to Langit, natagaan nu ka goinawa to tibo no otow kai to tano. Kuntoon, ipapitow nu kanami ko hondoi to soini no daruwa ka pig–alam nu
mugtas
No duon otow dio to taliwaro to sikan no nalibulung no mgo otow no nigpaagbotan din to nigkagi ki Hisus to, “Maistru, kohoy-ui a nu. Pitow ka to anak ku no lukos no bugtung no anak ku.
bu-ingan
Agad nokoy ka ignangon ku, konò ogpa-agad-agad no og-ugpò diò to dangob no anak din.
Ka mgo otow no ogtuu to si Hisus ka Anak to Magboboot, sikan ian ka ogpakaroog no ogligal to mgo maroot no mgo batasan to soini no kalibutan.
tuang
lalì
Ka igbuyu ku, mgo sulod, to ogkakohoy-uan kow tibo to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu. Kai ro ian taman. Kanak no si Pablo.
Mgo boi no duon asawa, ipariralom now ka goinawa now to asawa now unawa to igpariralom now ka goinawa now to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus.
Nasunud ni Amonggoy si Anuay.
Kagi pa ni Hisus, “Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu. Agad hontow ka ogtinawo to otow no ogsuguon ku, songo ogtinawoon a rin. Agad ko ogtinawoon a, songo ogtinawoon din ka nigsugu koddi no Amoy ku no Magboboot.”
Ka sikan no mgo otow no ogtokod to kono no tu-tuu ian no ugpaan dan ka soini no kalibutan, ogpohitaga to ogpamangho sikandan to tu-tuu ian no ugpaan dan.
Napolalan ad nigtagad koykow; ganna a rò.
Duon to sikan no mgo pinayag ka mohon-ing no mgo malotoy no otow no ogmanhibathibat. Duon ka mgo nabutud, mgo napulid, woy ka mgo kono oggoram to lawa ran.
pogò
Di to mgo otow no kono ogtuu, maroot ka pogdinog dan to sikan no nangnangonon, no ian ogkounawaan ka igpangus-us no igkasongoti ran no ogpakatuon to igkamatoy ran. Di to mgo otow no nigtuu, moomut atag ka pogngarog dan to sikan no nangnangonon su ian ka ogpokouyag kandan. Hontow pa ka litos no og-alap-alap to soini no katondanan? Waro poron.
No nanaawo on ka tibo no mgo pulu to dagat woy warad kitaa ka mgo kabubunganan.
Woy ko duon pad dangob no ogkoiniatan now, og–awoson to ogtagad kow to allow no litos to balaod ta no ogpalimud on ka mgo taga lunsud oyow ogkohusayon.
Pogdinog to mgo pogbuyagon to sikan no intabak to mgo suguanon ni Hisus, nabolu lagboy sikandan no oghimatayan dan on poron.
Pogkaponga, nigpapanoik din on woy si Pablo to baloy rin woy nigpakoon din on sikandan. No ka talagbantoy to pirisuan woy ka tibo no mgo duma rin no duon to baloy rin, narago lagboy su nigtuu on to Magboboot.
Ian ogkangaranan ta no uripon ka ungod ogpatalabauon. Ogkabaybayaran on sikandan.
Ka otow no oglalow to duma rin, ogpangusig sikandin.
No soini ka sulat dan no igpaalap kandan dio to Antiokia, “Sikanami no mgo suguanon ni Hisus woy ka mgo pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu no kai to Hirusalim, ogpapangumustaan noy sikaniu no mgo sulod noy to pogtuu ta ki Hisus no kono no Hudiu no taga Antiokia, mgo taga Siria woy ka taga Silisia.
Balagad on poron, mgo sulod, ko dakol ka pogsagman to mgo otow kaniu ko maroyow pa ka tuud dan. Ko sikan poron ka batasan dan, agad waro a dio to kaniu, songo litos.
Ka sikan no mgo pananglitan, kono ogligkat do duon to kanami no doromdom su songo duon dod to Balaod ta.
Ko napawo on, manangnangonoy ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad, tagkos to mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu dan, mgo talag-anad to Balaod dan woy ka tibo no dangob no duon katondanan oyow ogbootan dan ko nokoy ka oghimuon dan ki Hisus. Nò, impabanggutan dan sikandin to lubid woy inhatod dan sikandin dio to baloy ni Pilatu.
bulung
Og-awoson no ogkohoy-uan now ka tibo no mgo otow su marani on ka poglibong to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta kai to tano.
gawoy
Nig-uran to dakol woy niglanog ka woig woy songo nigkalamag to maagbot no niglibonglibong no ogpakasugat dio to baloy. Nò, sikan no baloy, napolod woy nagulak su dio to bayokbok nokountud.”
Ko duon igkabulig now to mgo otow no publi, kono now ignangon to agad hontow. Awoson no kono ogkatagaan agad ka lagboy no alukuy now.
Di sikanta no nig-abin on to Magboboot, agad Hudiu woy ka kono, nataga ki to ligkat to nighimu ni Kristu, impohitaga to Magboboot ka kabogbogan din woy ka katouanan din.
Pogpitow ku, duon Nati no Karniru no nigsasindog dio to tangkaan to sikan no pinnuuanan to pandatuan to Lagboy no Igbuyag. Niglinglingotan sikandin to sikan no hop-at no mgo hinimu no duon goinawa woy to sikan no mgo pogbuyagon. Songo nigkita ku dio to lawa to Karniru ka mgo indanan to nakabayo sikandin to kamatayon dongan. Woy duon papitu no mgo sukat din woy songo papitu ka mgo mata rin. Sikan ka mgo indanan to sikan no papitu no igpohitaga to kabogbogan to Gimukud to Magboboot no impaalap din dio to agad hondoi kai to tano.
babawan
Pogkapawo on, niglimud ni Hisus ka mgo sakup din no ungod nigdumaruma kandin, no pig-alam din ka sampulu woy darua no pighingaranan din on to apostolis.
Nataga a to mgo batasan now: to indakoli now sikanak woy ka mgo duma now to goinawa, woy to nohogot ka pogtuu now kanak. Woy nigtuman now ka mgo insugu ku woy nig-aguanta now ka mgo igkabaybayari no ogligkat to pogtuu now kanak. No ka mgo oghimuon now kuntoon, madmaroyow on to sikan no nighimu now nokani.
Waro otow no nakakita to Magboboot. Agad sagboka, waro. Ka bugtung no Anak to Magboboot no sikandin ka layun dio to longod to Amoy rin no nokog-unawa ka goinawa ran, kandin ka nighitaga kanta bahin to Magboboot.
Ian su nataga kow to og-awoson now no og-unug kow to kanami no batasan no wa koy mapogul no ogtalabau no dio koy pad to kaniu.
Agad to duon igkamasakit to goinawa noy, di ungod koy ro ogtukow to igkarago noy ki Hisus. Agad to waro salapi noy di mohon-ing ka ogparatuon noy to pogtuu ran. Woy ko ogkoiling to waro kalaglagan noy di nohimu koy no tagtuun to tibo no imbogoy to Magboboot kanami.
amoy
Ligkat to sikan no allow, inpasabut ni Hisus to mgo hibatoon din ko nokoy ka ogpokouma kandin. Kagi rin to, “Awoson no oghondio a to dakol no lunsud to Hirusalim no ogkabaybayaran a to mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu, woy to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad, woy to mgo talag-anad to Balaod. ogpohimatayan a ran di ogkootawan a rod to igkatatolu no allow.”
Ogbanoson ta ka tagob to mo-irob. oyow ogmalanang.
Woy kagi rin pad kanak to, “Kono nu igholos ka soini no impanoy innangonnangon to soini no nasulatan su magaan on ogkatuman ka tibo.
su ka pogtuu to mgo masalig no otow dongan, ian ligkatan to igkarago to Magboboot kandan.
bakosan
upul
To nataga on ka sikan no boi to kono ogpakaholos ki Hisus to pighimu rin, nigdani ki Hisus no nigluhud kai to tangkaan din. Nigkolkol ka boi. No kai to tangkaan to tibo no mgo otow innangon din ki Hisus to tuud din no ogsamsam to kinabo din to, “To nigsamsam ad to kinabo nu nò nabawian on ka dalu ku.”
bukonuton
Sikan ka allow to igtagad dan to sunud no allow no Pagkoonan to Paligad no kono ogpakatalabau ka mgo Hudiu. Marani on ogkougtu ian ko niglibuwas si Pilatu. Kagi rin kuwo to mgo Hudiu, “Wow mgo Hudiu, soini on ka kaniu no Labow no Igbuyag.”
tagkas
Pogkouma on ni Pablo, niglinglingotan on to mgo Hudiu no nigligkat to Hirusalim. Mohon–ing ka imbayung dan kandin to igbaghot ian no igbayung. Dokad di waro man igkamalogot to sikan no ignangon dan.
apug
Ka batò no oglangkob, og-ilud-ilud on ka ogpananap.
tinduk
Ka lituk to ogkatangkob ka allow, ogsalop on ka allow. Ogkaloplop on.
bugtung
Og-a-alamaraan to ogsulungan ka songo baloy. Ka sikan no a-alamaraan, moon-ing lagboy ka oglusud ka sikan no usig dan.
Waro pulus to mgo katouanan to mgo otow no nahan dan no natou sikandan woy songo waro pulus ka mgo otow no og-anad to Balaod ni Moisis, woy ka ogkatou to og-alap to alukuyon. Woy impohitaga on to Magboboot to naalang-alang on ian ka mgo ogkatouanan do duon no ogligkat to mgo otow to soini no kalibutan.
Igsapul kud koykow ka so-ini no salapì ku no songo gatus na-an dò
gawhan
Di ko ogtabak kinow to, ‘Nigpuun to mgo otow,’ ogkahallok kinow ko nokoy ka oghimuon to mgo otow kanta, su nasagboka on ian ka pogtuu ran to malogot ian no talagnangon si Huan to kagi to Magboboot.”
kolos
gingò
tu-up
Di ko nigkita ran sikandin no oghihipanow to laplap to woig nahan dan no gimukud to namatoy ka ogkitoon dan no nakangangang dan on
lampod
Ko oghipanow ki, ogtakang ki.
No kagi to igbuyag din to, ‘Ka kagi no niglibuwas to bo-bo nu kuntoon, sikan ka ligkatan to iglogpad ku koykow. Maroot ka no suguonon su nataga ka naan to igbuyag a no wa kohoy-u ku su ogkuon ku ro to konon koddi, woy to oggaani a to waro ku isawod.
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, no ogsulat a kaniu to kai a pad to mariu su oyow ka katondanan no imbogoy ni Hisus no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, konad og-awoson no iglogpad kaniu, su ian porom tuud to sikan no katondanan oyow ogkohogot on ka pogtuu now. Kono ian no tuud din no igpasuwoy ka pogtuu now.
Agad ka mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, songo ogpakamalogot to soini su impanoy ran ingkanangon tongod ki Hisus ka nigkagi ran to, ‘Agad hontow no ogtuu kandin, ogkaawo on ka salo dan su nigtuu on to ngaran din,’ ” kagi ni Pedro.
Nò, nigtuu on kandin ka mohon-ing no mgo otow dio.
Sikanta kai, mgo taga Partia mgo taga Midia, taga Ilam, taga Misopotamia, taga Hudia, taga Kapadusia, taga Pontu, woy taga Asia,
gobù
Pogkouma din on, duon pigtilala rin no si Akila. Hudiu si Akila no dio mootow to lunsud to Pontu di iam pad mokouma to Kurintu ligkat to probinsia to Italia. Nigduma ka asawa rin no si Prisila. Ian to nighalin dio to Kurintu su duon insugu ni Klaudiu no ian igbuyag dio to Ruma oyow ogkaawo on ka tibo no mgo Hudiu no nokougpo dio to lunsud to Ruma no duon to probinsia to Italia. Nò, nigpanumbaloy si Pablo dio ki Akila,
potung
No ka tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus, nigsagboka ro ka goinawa ran woy nig–un–unawa ka pogdoromdom dan. Woy pigsasalupungan dan ka mgo kalaglagan dan su waro otow no ogkagi to, “Kalaglagan ku soini” ko kono tibo dan no kalaglagan.
kopit
Ko du-on ogko-iniatan no ogpangasawa, og-abalangon. Og-alukuyon ungod ka amoy taman to ogho-o on.
taglas
Kagi pad ni Hisus, “Pigsugu ku sikaniu oyow oggaani kow to soin no mgo otow no kono no sikaniu ka talag-orok to kagi to Magboboot dio to goinawa ran no waro now ikabaybayari. Ka duma no mgo otow, sikandan ka nabaybayaran woy sikaniu ka napulusan to kandan no nighimu.” Soini ka kagi ni Hisus kuwo to mgo hibatoon din.
Ogkarigarol a koykow to ogpalawod su warò bag salapì ku kunto-on.
bugsi
luboy
Nataga a to ogkoiling to ogkaangol-angol a su inat to ogpakasayo a to kanak no lawa. Di nahan dan to sikandan ka suguanon ni Hisu Kristu. Ko tu-tuu pa ka ignangon dan, kanak ka madmaroyow no suguanon din su dakoldakol man lagboy ka kanak no pogpoomot to talabau ku. Woy molmohon-ing pad ka kanak no pogkapirisu woy ka pogbaras to lawa ku. Woy mohon-ing ka ingkabayo ku no malintok naan do no ogkamatoy a.
No sikanak no si Tirisiu no nigpasulat ni Pablo to soini no sulat, songo ogpangumusta a kaniu no mgo duma ku to pogtuu ta ki Hisus no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
Di ka otow no ogkahallok no og-unug kanak, woy ka kono ogkasaligan, woy ka oghimu to mgo maroot, woy ka ogpamunu, woy ka oghimu to maroot to kono no asawa ran, woy ka oghimu to mgo pamulinganon, woy ka ogsimba to mgo inotow-otow, woy ka og-uubat, igdogpak sikandan tibo dio to ogliabliab no hapuy to asupri. No ian ka igkararuwa no kamatayon.”
Ka mgo bo-ugan, ogkoko-oti-an on to oggulabung.
tagpos
toggas
woy imbogoy rin kanta ka Gimukud din no igmaganangon to ogtumanon din ka tibo no innangon din kanta.
No ko duon boi no nabalu no ogbogayan now to katondanan woy ko ogbuligan now to pog-ugpo din, kono nu ipalista ko wa pad nokouma to kohon-oman ka tuid din. Woy og-awoson to kasagboka ro naasawa.
Ka Magboboot ta, kono no Magboboot to mgo namatoy sikandin. Sikandin ka Magboboot to mgo otow no nouyag. Natalap kow on.”
pangusig
Ko nigdaralu, sikan ka nighinangan to Bailan. Ko du-on babuy, sikan ka ogtubaran dan no ogmanasayow on ka bailan no ogpalpalibut to babuy.
nanay
Doromdoma now ka mgo manukmanuk no ogmanlayanglayang. Kono og-orok sikandan woy kono oggaani woy songo kono oglilimud to iggaani ran dio to mgo pinayag. Di ka Amoy tanow dio to langit ka ogsunggud kandan. Sikaniu man ka labow to mgo manukmanuk.
Ka tanò ligkat to songo bubungan, ogbangalug to bunsaran to dangob no bubungan.
kinawow
tinugpù
Nò, nig-awos ka pogkouyag ni Hisus kai to tano oyow ogpokounawa kanta no mgo hari rin. No ian ian su oyow oggoramon din ka tibo no oggoramon ta oyow ogkohimu on sikandin no mahoy-u woy ogkasaligan no Labow to mgo Talagpanubad dio to tangkaan to Magboboot. No ka tuud din oyow ogkaawo din on ka mgo salo ta no ig-ayun ka goinawa ta to Magboboot.
Ian su nahan to mgo otow no naangol ka pighimu to Magboboot ko namatoy si Hisus to krus, di sikan ka madmaroyow to tibo no katouanan to mgo otow. Agad to nahan dan no malintok ka kabogbogan to Magboboot, di ian ka niglabow to tibo no kanokalan to mgo otow.
Di, agad hontow no ogpakasampit to ngaran to Lagboy no Igbuyag, ogkapangabangan sikandin.’ ” Ian ka kinagian to Magboboot no ingkasulat ni Hoil.
Duon dio ka sulod to sika otow no nasipsip ni Pedro ka talinga rin. Suguonon ka soin no otow to sikan no Labow to mgo Talagpanubad. Nig-inso din to, “Pigkita kud sikoykow buwa no nigduma ka ki Hisus ko dio to sikan no pinamula to kayu?”
No og-awoson to, ka pogtuu now, ian now ogkounawaan ka dalig to kayu no nig-ugsob dio to diralom to tano. Sikan ian, unugi now ka batasan ni Hisus woy ay-ayari now tuui ka tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon unawa to sikan no ingkaanad kaniu nokani. Woy layun now pasalamati ka Magboboot.
obù
Pogkouma ran dio to Dirbi, no nignangnangonan dan ka mgo otow to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus. Mohon–ing ka mgo taga Dirbi no nigpasakup ki Hisus. Pogkaponga, si Pablo daruwa ki Birnabi, niglibongan dan ka mgo lunsud to Listra woy ka Ikuniu woy ka Antiokia no duon to probinsia to Pisidia.
untul
abu
Nò nigsugu din ka duma no sundalu din dio to pirisuan no nigtampod dan ka liog ni Huan.
panit
No to pogloko to Nati no Karniru to sikan no igkararuwa no imparokot to sikan no ogbasoon, nigdinog ku ka igkararuwa to sikan no hop-at no hinimu no duon goinawa. No kagi rin to, “Hondini kad on.”
Ka tibo no mgo otow no igdakoli ku to goinawa, ogsaparan ku woy oglogparan ku. Sikan ian, balowbalawi now ka goinawa now woy poomot kow no oghimu to maroyow.
Ian su to soini no ighondio ku kaniu, kono a ogkoiniat no ogsagpit a ro duon su og-iman-iman a ko ogmalugoy a pad poron to kaniu ko igbogoy to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
Pogpitow ni Simon to ogbogayan on to Gimukud to Magboboot ka mgo otow to nigtorong to bolad to mgo suguanon ni Hisus to pog–ampu dan, ogbogoy poron si Simon to salapi woy ki Pedro.
Kagi ni Doktura, “Pila nu no simana ka og-ulì diò to kaniu?” Kagi ni Usì, “Agad na-an su maga-an a rò oglibong.”
bokas
No ko ogpakatood ka kamatayon ku, og-awoson to songo ogpakadalong kow to igkarago ku.
Sikan ian to nohogot on ian ka pogtuu noy to kagi no innangon dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot tongod ki Hisus, no og-awoson to og-ay-ayaran ta no ogpamminogan. Ian su ka in-anad dan, ogkounawa to ilawan no ogpakabat-ow kanta ko marusilom taman to ogsilo on ka Buntatalo ko ogkapawo on. Ian su ogkabat-awan on ka goinawa ta tagood to oglibong si Hisu Kristu kai to tano.
Sikan ian, ko nig–uli si Pedro dio to Hirusalim, nigsamilian sikandin to mgo nigtuu no mgo Hudiu no ogkoiniatan to songo igpatuli ka mgo iglukos to mgo nigtuu no kono no Hudiu.
duldul
ongat
Nò, duon nokouma no mgo Hudiu no dio mogligkat to mgo lunsud to Antiokia woy ka Ikuniu, no nigsasow ran ka mgo taga Listra. No sikan ian to pigdorogpak to mgo otow si Pablo to dakol no batu, woy nigganuy ran on ka lawa rin dio to libuwasan to lunsud su nahan dan no namatoy on.
tultul
Woy puun to mohon-ing no mgo otow, nanlibuwas on ka mgo busow, no ogbabansagon ka mgo busow to, “Sikoykow naan ian ka Anak to Magboboot.” Di nigsaparan ni Hisus ka mgo busow no kono din ogpakagion su nataga ka mgo busow to si Hisus, ian ka Kristu no Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan.
Si Apulus no sulod ta, malasi a nigbuyu to oyow ogduma to sikan no mgo nigtuu no ogpanumbaloy dio to kaniu. Di waro pad noiniat sikandin to ogduma. Di ko duon liwak din oghondio dod kun to kaniu.
Woy songo nohimu on si Abraham no kaap-apuan to mgo Hudiu no nigpatuli ko songo inlagkos dan dod ka pog-unug dan to pogtuu ni Abraham no waro pad mogpatuli.
ig-ubus dan abata ka impamula ku no bontung no warò nigpataga to nigbuyù. Ka sikan no batasan dan, igpa-ampow-ampow to duma ran.
Ogkounawa ian soini. Igpamula to songo lukos ka sagboka no boni to mustasa no ian ka doisok do no boni kai to soin no kalibutan.
bogat
hikot
Ko ogkapanoy ogkatapid ka batò diò to diralom to gotok, oglomulan ka inoy ko og-anak.
Ian su, to mgo otow no waro maroot no tagu to goinawa ran, tibo maroyow kandan ka inhimu to Magboboot. Di to mgo otow no duon maroot no nakatagu to goinawa ran woy waro mogtuu, kono ogmaawang ka kandan no goinawa to agad nokoy su maroot ka goinawa ran woy ka ogkaroromdom dan.
“Nangoni koy to katondanan nu,” kagi ran. “Nangoni koy oyow duon igkatabak noy to mgo nigsugu kanami. Nokoy ka ignangon nu bahin to katondanan nu?”
Sikan ian to nohogot on ka pogtuu to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus, no allow–allow natimtimulan on ka mgo otow no nigtuu on kandin.
Ungod ogwo-ilwo-il ka bituka nu su warad tagù din.
Ka tanò no Mindanao, su nalingutan to dagat, napulù no tanò
Ian su, ka mgo otow to sikan, ian dan do oggogoinawoon ka kandan no lawa woy duon dakol no goinawa ran to salapi. Ogpagarolgarol. Ogmandoot to mgo duma ran, woy kono ogpaagad-agad to amoy ran mgo inoy ran. Ko ogbogayan sikandan to maroyow, kono dan igkarago. Woy waro goinawa ran to ogkoiniatan to Magboboot.
sumpil
kali
Kagi to inoy, "Kai ka su ogpamminog a to gotok nu ko maniò to og-o-oguk ka gotok nu."
kaglas1
Ko inat to warò makapanutbrus to pila no allow, sikan ian ka tingoon.
Mgo sulod, kono ki ogpakigsagboka to mgo otow no waro nigtuu su kono man ogkohimu no ogpokogsolug ka maroot woy ka maroyow unawa to songo kono ogkohimu no ogpokog-amut ka marusilom to maallow.
Dokad di, ka Magboboot no ian ogbulig to goinawa to mgo otow no ogkohunus, sikandin ka nigbulig to goinawa noy su nokouma on si Titu.
Ka sikan no bunanat, ogmoon-ing on no ogtangkap on dio to kanta no ugpa-an.
po-pò
Pogkapawo no ungod do ogmaagbot ka bagyu, nigbunsuran noy on to ogpan–ulugon ka kalaglagan dio to woig.
batuk
Nigtunlunan ni Hisus ka sikan no kayu no kagi rin, “Kono kad on oghutuk ogbogas taman to taman.” Nigdinog to mgo hibatoon din ka kagi rin.
sum-ak
Konò no olog to ogkasambayan su masakit so pa-a to kuddò.
linggot
kalatkat
lala
gakit
Nokani, nigmaroot ku ka ngaran din woy nigdootdootan ku sikandin woy nigbaybayaran ku ka mgo otow no nigtuu kandin. Dokad di, nohoy-uan a rod nasi to Magboboot su waro a pad nigtuu no waro a pad mataga to maroot ka oghimuon ku.
Oghutukon ku pad to ignangon ka ingkasulat kud ganna oyow kono now ogdoromdomon to naangol-angol a. Di ko ian ka pogdoromdom now, balagad. Di bogayi a now pa to liwak ku to igmarayandayan no malintok do.
Ka mgo pogbuyagon to mgo otow no nigtuu, ko maroyow ka pog-alap dan to katondanan dan, litos no ogdakolon now ka igbogoy now kandan no igsayo now. Di ian now lagboy og-awoson no ogbogayan ka sikan no mgo pogbuyagon no ogpoomot to ogpan-udling woy to ogpang-anad kaniu
sumpul
Nigbatbatan din to, “Sikan no lukos ko og-ongkoran din ka asawa rin woy oghutuk ogpangasawa to dangob no boi, ogpakalibug ka sikan no lukos.
Ko ogpakapango-on ka anak ku diò to songo baloy no warò nigpataga kanak to nigko-on, og-ogotan ku.
Si Salmon asawa rin si Rahab. Ka anak dan ian si Boas. Si Boas, amoy ni Obid. Si Rut ka inoy ni Obid. Si Obid amoy ni Jesse.
Konò no tu-tu-u no agpot si Mery su tigbal dò nighirogò to songo mausilom
No ian ka nighimu ni Hisu Kristu su oyow ka karoyawon no innangon to Magboboot dongan ki Abraham, songo ogkabogoy to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. No ian to oyow ligkat to pogtuu ta ki Hisus, tibo kinow, ogkabogayan to Gimukud to Magboboot su sikan ka impanoy innangon to Magboboot no igbogoy rin kanta.
ubut
Di ka otow no inlansang dio to limang no krus, nigsaparan din on ka nigsusumpalit to, “Waro tahud nu to Magboboot? Waro ka makaroromdom to nig-uunawa ro ka iglogpad kanta?
dua
No songo nigpitow ni Pedro daruwa ki Huan ka napulid. Kagi ni Pedro kuwo to napulid to, “Pitow ka kanami.”
ayat
Ogka-aras si Inò to kamot din su dakol ka hilamonon to homoy rin. Ogkagi rin to ogkara-at ka homoy rin su konò ogko-ubus no oghilamonon.
damoy
opuy
Nigtonggak si Hisus no kagi rin to sikan no boi, “Igi, hondoi ka mgo nigbayung koykow? Warad nagalat no sagboka no ogbobootan sikoykow?”
Nò, ogkoiniatan to mgo sundalu no oghimatayan ka mgo napirisu no pigbantayan dan su kakuwo ko duon oglumbuk no ogpakapallaguy on.
babangonon
inagak
Agad hontow ka ogpamuyu dio to Magboboot ogkabogayan sikandin. Sikandan no ogpamangho, ogkakitaan dan ka ogpamanghoon dan. Woy sikandan no ogpangumow dio to tano, songo ogkapuwasan ka gumawan kandan to Magboboot.
Og-awoson no oglipasan din on ka maroot woy ian din oghimuon ka maroyow. Woy og-awoson to og-ungod ogpamangho to oghimuon din ka ogpakabogoy to maroyow no pog-ugpo.
Og-agas ka siak no ogtugdò diò to lawa; og-amut on diò to lawa. Ogngaranan to tugda-an to mgo woig.
Nigtabak si Huan to, “Hoo, ogpabautismuan ku to woig. Di duon kai to kanta ka otow no wa now pad tokora.
To nakaratong si Hudas, no nigparagas sikandin nighondio ki Hisus woy nigkagi rin to, “Nò, Maistru.” Woy nigharokan din si Hisus.
dakol
limbangawan
bagukbuk
doyow
Poomoti nu ka pogtuman nu to tibo no insalig koykow tongod to pogtuu nu oyow ogkapurut nu ka igsayo koykow no kouyagan no waro katamanan. Sikan ian ka tuud to Magboboot koykow no pig-abin ka rin no nignangon ka to sikan no maroyow no pognangonnangon nu to pogtuu nu no dio ka to tangkaan to mohon-ing no mgo otow no ian nigpamalogot to kagi nu.
Sikan ian, agad Hudiu woy ko kono no Hudiu, waro og-umalagon ta no otow. Ian su to tangkaan to Magboboot, ka nigpatuli woy ka waro nigpatuli, ogkounawa ro. Songo og-uunawa ro ka goinawa rin to sikan no duon natouan woy ko waro natouan, ka uripon woy ka waro mouripon. Ian su sikanta no nig-iam on to Magboboot, waro ogpakalabow. Ian do ogpakalabow, si Kristu. No sikandin ka dio to taliwaro ta tibo no nigpasakup kandin.
kagù
kamoy
Ogtalaran; kasagapon koy.
Ian su og-awoson to kono tad oghimuon ka agad nokoy no ogpakabogoy to igmasakit to goinawa to Gimukud to Magboboot. Ian su sikandin ka igmalogot to nohimu kid on no sakup to Magboboot woy to duon dod allow no ogkapongaan on to Magboboot ka pogpangabang din kanta to mgo salo ta.
hudhud
Niglibong ka mgo pulis dio to mgo pogbuyagon dan no innangonnangon dan on ka nigkagi ni Pablo. No ko natagaan dan to nasakup naan woy si Pablo to gobirnu to Ruma, nahallok on sikandan.
Nò sika sampulu woy sagboka no hibatoon ni Hisus nighondio sikandan to Galilia. Nighondio ian sikandan to bubungan no innangon nokani ni Hisus kandan.
Kagi rin, “Pamminog kow! Oghondio kinow to Hirusalim no ko dio, koddi no Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan, ighatod a rio to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy to mgo talag-anad to Balaod ta. Ogbobootan a ran to ogpohimatayan a no ighatod ad on dio to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu.
Ka otow no ogkolopon, oghagsilon su nigdaralu to malaria sikandin.
Oghinarang ki to hapuy ko oghagsilan ki ko on ogkapawò.
Ka kinabo to sikan no boi, nohimu to lagboy no mahal no manggad no malugowlugow woy malalab. Woy nangini-kinì to mgo bulawan woy ka mahal no mgo batu woy ka mgo baliog no oghingaranan to pirlas. No duon niggongon din no boung no naponu to mgo maligsom no ogpakasipod no nigligkat to sikan no maroot no mgo batasan din.
higwak
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Duon sagboka no inso ku kaniu. Ko ogpakatabak kow, ognangonan kow to puunan to katondanan ku.
tiluk
Du-on otow no nakaboli to tanò no malu-ag ka nanapunapù. Maluag ka masandig
Songo allow, duon duma no mgo otow no nigmarani ki Hisus no nigmanangnangonoy bahin to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu. Maroyow kun su ka mgo alabat no nighimu no batu no maroyow lagboy. Songo maroyow to pogpitow ka sikan mgo kasangkapan no imbogoy dio to Magboboot. Di kagi ni Hisus to,
Ka ogpangasawa, nalugoy on no wa pad nigdatong. Omunaan no nohirogo on sikandan to pogtatagad dan.
kilow
bayow
Ko igkalobong on ka soini no lawa ta, ogkoiling dod to lawa to soini no kalibutan. Di ko ogkouyag on, songo loin on no litos to og-ugpo dio to ugpaan to Magboboot no konad on ogkamatoy. No su duon lawa ta no litos to og-ugpo kai to tano, songo duon dod uromo no lawa ta no litos to og-ugpo dio to ugpaan to Magboboot.
Ko duon otow no oggogolgol to salapi, ian ligkatan to agad nokoy lunsud no maroot no batasan. Ligkat to sikan no pogkoibog dan to salapi, duon mgo otow no nig-ongkod to pogtuu ran no kuntoon, duon on dakol lagboy no igmasakit so goinawa ran. Ian ogkounawa to nounoy sikandan napano to tunud.
hinang
Kagi pa ni Hisus kuwo to mgo hibatoon din, “Kona ad on oghingaran kaniu to suguonon ku su waro mataga ka mgo suguonon to oghimuon to igbuyag din. Oghingaranan ku sikaniu to mgo amigu ku,” kagi ni Hisus, “su nignangonan kow on to tibo no innangon to Amoy ku koddi.
Nò, duon duma no mgo otow no duon katondanan no nig-iloban dan si Hisus woy nigsagpong dan ka mata rin woy ran suntoka sikandin no kagi ran to, “Tag-an ka ko hontow ka nigsuntok koykow.” Ka mgo sundalu, songo nigsampak dan sikandin ko inhatod dan sikandin dio to kandan.
su sikan ka pogbunsud to poglogpad to Magboboot to mgo usig din, no ogkatuman on ka tibo no ingkasulat dongan to kagi to Magboboot.
Ka sikan no agot-ot no tanò, malalab woy mammikot. Oghimuon no mgo kuron.
nipis
Si Hisus ka nigtabak kandan to pananglitan din to, “Ka otow no waro dalu, kono din og-awos ka talagtambal. Ka otow no duon dalu, sikandin ian ka og-awos to talagtambal.”
payad
Sugua nu woy anara nu ka mgo otow to soini no innangon ku koykow.
kagis
polo-polò
Ogkounawa rod to mgo Hudiu no kono pad ogpaagad-agad to kinagian to Magboboot, su ligkat to ogkohoy-uan kow, songo ogkohoy-uan on sikandan.
Nanagpitsagpit woy si Birnabi to mgo lunsud to sikan no pulu to Sipri taman to nokouma on sikandan to lunsud to Papus no dio to koopusan do to sikan no tano. Dio to Papus, duon nigkita ran no bailan. No ka ngaran din si Barhisus. Hudiu sikandin no ognangon to talagnangon sikandin to kinagian to Magboboot. Dokad di, ubat.
Ko du-on ogsukut to kuddò di naruad, agad nokoy ka igbogoy ka nakapurut to kuddò.
lukung
bogbog
Di sikaniu atag, ko nigtuu kow on ki Kristu, ka ingkaanad kaniu, kono no ka sikan no maroot no mgo batasan dan
Kagi pa ni Hisus to, “Kono ka ogkabolongbolong to ignangon ku koykow to og-awoson nu to ogkohutuk ka ogkootow.”
Ogkoimu on no abug ka alibu ko iglayap to kalamag. Ka harina, ko igtopung ta ka saku to harina, ogkoimu on no abug su oglayap.
bo-ot
Bagunta-as ka olatan to Valencia to Nasuli.
Niggoram ad to alas to sikan no tapilak no nakakagat to pa-a ku.
di narago ad to wara a rio ko namatoy sikandin oyow ogkatimulan ka pogtuu now to ogkitoon now. Oghondio kid kandin.” Sikan ka kagi ni Hisus.
Ka aku, ogparumaan to ogpanabod.
Di nigtabak si Hisus kanak to, ‘Hipanow kad on su ogsuguon ku sikoykow dio to mariu oyow ogkanangonan nu ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu to nangnangonon ku,’ kagi ni Hisus kanak,” kagi ni Pablo.
Hondu-on dò ian ka dakol.
tag-an
Ka otow no ogsawod to bonì no homoy diò to kamot din, igbolobog din dò ka pogsawod din oyow og-un-anawa no warò ogmakopal to pogsawod.
Natamakan on.
Ka alibutod, ogbangbangan; oggalongon.
Pogkamarusilom on, duon impapitow to Magboboot ki Pablo. No duon nigkita rin no taga Masidonia no nigsasindog woy nigbuyu kandin to, “Lapas kow on dini to Masidonia woy pangabangi koy.”
saliddingan
sugoy
Ko bato ki pad, nigsaparan ki to mgo amoy ta no nigligkat to kandan do no goinawa. Di ka pogsapad to Magboboot no amoy ta, ian su oyow duon pulus ta no ogkatalaran ki to pogkamatuwarong din.
su
Ka ilis to woig no napò no ogtubu-an to tibogow, sikan ka bagunbun no tanò
Dongan, ka sikan no anak ni Agar no nigligkat do to pogboot to otow ka pogkootow rin, nigbayadbayad to anak ni Sara no nootow su ligkat to pogboot to Gimukud to Magboboot. No kuntoon mgo sulod, songo ogkounawa ki ka nigtuu su songo ogkabaybayaran ki to sikan no mgo otow no ogsalig to kandan no pogtuman.
toì
Woy nig-alam ka Magboboot to sikan no mgo otow no oglomotan to mgo otow no waro nigtuu to soini no kalibutan. Woy nig-alam din ka mgo otow no malintok to pogpitow ran to oyow igpohitaga rin to waro ian pulus to sikan no nahan to mgo otow no duon ogkapulusan.
pad
ko nokoy ka madmaroyow no oghimuon now. Ko ogkatuman ka sikan, ogkohimu no waro igkoogot kaniu woy to maroyow kow on ian to tangkaan to Magboboot to poglibong uromo ni Kristu kai to tano.
Ko pinabayo to kawanan no bolad nu ogpakasalo ka, tampori nu woy igdogpak nu. Madmaroyow ko sagboka ro ka bolad nu to duon darua no bolad nu no igdogpak ka tibo no lawa nu dio to imperno.
landog
Songo unawa rod ka ingkabolongbolong to sika darua no lukos no sikandan ka duma ni Simon to ogngangalap. Ka ngaran dan si Santiago woy si Huan no mgo anak ni Sibidiu. Kagi ni Hisus ki Simon to, “Kono ka ogkahallok. Hantod kuntoon, nig-alap nud ka mgo ngalap to woig. Ligkat kuntoon, og-alapan nu rod ka mgo otow kai to koddi oyow ogkoimu sikandan no mgo sakup ku.”
koddol
bulangison
Ko pinabayo to kawanan no mata nu ogpakasalo ka, lukata nu woy igdogpak nu. Madmaroyow ko sagboka ro ka mata nu to duon darua no mata nu no igdogpak ka tibo no lawa nu dio to imperno.
To nigkita ni Hisus ka mohon-ing lagboy no mgo otow, nigtakorog sikandin to malopot no bubungan no ampow-ampow ro to mgo otow. To nigpinnuu dio nigdani ka mgo hibatoon din kandin.
Soini ka pogboot to nigsugu koddi. Ian to kono ogkalagak dio to dalan no oghondio to Magboboot ka agad sagboka to tibo no imbogoy rin to ogtuu koddi. Woy goinawa rin ian to ogpootawan ku sikandan to mohuri no allow.
Dokad di to niglinglingotan on si Pablo to mgo nigtuu no nig–onow on woy nigparagas on to nigsasindog woy nigsolod man do to lunsud to Listra. Pogkapawo on, nigduma si Pablo ki Birnabi no nighondio to lunsud to Dirbi.
Di ko duon mgo otow no ogkaangol-angol no ogpaap-apuloy tongod to mgo ingkasulat no mgo ngaran to mgo kaap-apuan dan, woy ko ogpaap-apuloy tongod to Balaod no inggalat ni Moisis, kono ka og-amut to sikan su waro pulus.
banus
dalimasùn
Pogkaponga, no nigsasindog on ka igbuyag no si Agripa woy ka gobirnador woy si Birnisi woy mgo duma ran no naminpinnuu.
Ko diad on to dalan no ogtupang, nigsaparan ni Hisus ka tatolu no mgo hibatoon din no kagi rin, “Kono now nangoni ka agad hontow to nigkita now rio to bubungan. Woy kow on ogpakanangon to sika no nakitaan now ko koddi no Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan, ko ogkootawan a to igkamatoy ku.”
Di ko namatoy on si Hisus, natuman on ka impanangon to Magboboot to bo–bo to tibo no mgo talagnangon din dongan to ogkabaybayaran ka pig–alam din no ian ka Im–imanan to mgo Koot–otawan no oghingaranan ki Kristu,” kagi.
Ka alad to sikan no lunsud, hinimu to mahal no mgo batu no ogkohingaranan to haspir. No ka mgo baloy, hinimu to bulawan no waro solug no ogkoiling to lamita su mating-ow.
“No pigpasulungan to Magboboot kandan ka papitu no ugpaan to mgo taga Kanaan taman to naroog dan on. No imbogoy din on kandan ka sikan no tano to Kanaan. Nò, ligkat to pog–ugpo dan dio to Ehipto taman to napurut dan on ka tibo to sikan no ogkougpaan dan, mgo hop–at no gatus woy kalimaan no tuid ka nigligad,” kagi ni Pablo.
gopak
tinagpò
talunggawid
bukbuk
busung
kikik
tamiluk
alibu
Di duon duma no mgo otow no nigsusumpalit, no kagi ran to, “A. Nalasing do duon nò.”
No ko ungod ta og-aguantoon ka mgo igkabaybayari ta, mangkuwan, ogmatuwarong on ka pogtuu ta ki Hisus woy ogkohimu on to waro igkaalang-alang to batasan ta.
limu
To nigdinog to mgo igbuyag to talagpanubad woy to mgo Parisiu ka soini no mgo pananglitan, nakasabut to sikandan ka pighisugat to impananglitan ni Hisus.
Di ogpoiam to Magboboot ka goinawa ta to oyow sikandin ka ogpakaboot to pogdoromdom ta.
Ogkounawa ian si Kristu, su songo kasagboka ro ka pogtubad to lawa rin oyow ogkaawo din on ka salo to mohon-ing no mgo otow. No oglibong sikandin kai to tano. Di to sikan no poglibong din, konad to oyow og-awo to salo. Di ian tuud din to oglibong oyow ogkapangabangan din ka sikan no mgo otow no og-iman-iman to poglibong din.
bagnus
Ogtuu ka to duon sagboka ro no Magboboot. Maroyow, di kono pad no litos no pogtuu ka sikan su songo ogtuu ka mgo busow to duon sagboka ro no Magboboot no ogkolkolon to igkahallok dan to sikan no iglogpad din kandan uromo.
To pogsumansuman ni Husi to pog-ongkod din ki Maria, nigpatagoinop sikandin to diwata to Magboboot no nigkagi to sikan no diwata to “Koykow Husi no pinanganak ni Dabid no igbuyag dongan, kono nu ongkori si Maria su ka igkaboros din ligkat to kabogbogan to Gimukud to Magboboot.
otok
Dilipa nu ka balanghuy su igdampil tad on angkuwan.
Agad ogkapurut nu ka tibo no karoyawan kai to tano,” kagi ni Hisus, “waro ian pulus ko ian ka igkaawo to kouyagan nu dio to Magboboot.”
Ka abu-on, ko-iling to batok no alibu. Konò amana no mapotì; ogsolug.
to-ob
Nigtabak si Simon to, “Maistru, napawaan koy ro duon ka nigpanigay no waro noutol noy di ko sikoykow ka ognangon koddi, og-ulugon ku ro ka mgo sigay.”
losok
balingotngot
Woy nigtabak ka mgo otow no kagi ran to, ‘Waro talabau noy su waro nighinggat kanami.’ Woy nignangonan din sikandan to ‘Ko sikan naan, dio kow pa ogtalabau to pamulaanan ku to ubas.’ ”
dampò
du-on
Nò, pogpitow ku no duon dakol woy maputi no pinnuuanan to pandatuan, woy duon on ogpinpinnuu to sikan. Nanaawo ka tano woy ka langit dio to tangkaan din, no konad on ogkitoon.
kuddò
Unawa ka kagi ku to tibo no mgo otow to kagi ku kaniu. Bantoy kow!
digoydigoy
“Nigkagi ka gimukud to datu ki Abraham to, ‘Ko sikan ian Apu, oghangyu a koykow to oyow ogsuguon nu si Lasaru dio to baloy to amoy ku
Dongan to Balaod ni Moisis, ko duon otow no ogkaligsoman, nig-awos to duon langosa to baka woy ko kambing no igpamilikpilik to lawa rin woy nig-awos to ogbudburan pad to alibu to nati to baka no natutung oyow igpaawo to maligsom to sikan no otow.
anggò
labow
Natagaan ta to malogot ka tibo no nigpasulat to Magboboot. Nò, nighingaranan din to mgo magboboot ka sikan no mgo igbuyag no nasaligan din to kagi rin.
Hipanow kow woy inangon now kandan no magaan on ogkatuman ka Pogsugu to Magboboot kai to kalibutan.
Impaalap to Magboboot kanta ka mabogbog no Talagpangabang to mgo salo ta no kandin ka kapunganan ni Dabid no dongan no suguonon to Magboboot.
No nigparagas woy si Hisus no nighipanow no oghondio to dangob no lunsud.
Mgo sulod, ay-ayara now ka mgo batasan now to mgo otow no waro pad nigtuu oyow ko duon igliwak now, ogkaayun kow to ognangonnangon kandan tongod ki Hisus.
Nohirosonan lagboy ka goinawa ku no nigbaybayaran kud ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu no waro natagaan ku no sayop ku to pogtuman ku to sikan no mgo Balaod ni Moisis.
No dio to Langit, duon igpapitow ku no mgo kabolongbolonganan. Woy kai to tano, duon igpapitow ku no langosa, woy hapuy woy ka mgo obol no dakol.
ulamitan
butung
dalayuan
pa-agad-agad
pangatubung
No si Hirodis duma to mgo sundalu rin, nigbogoy ki Hisus to kasiporan woy nigsumpalitan dan on ian sikandin. Nig-ilisan dan si Hisus to maroyow woy mahal no manggad unawa to ilisan to dakol no igbuyag dan. To pogkaponga ran to nigsumpalit dan, impalibong man do ni Hirodis si Hisus dio ki Pilatu.
pogul
lubunan
duwa
tiugoy
kobong
Nò, ka soini no boi no songo Hudiu dod no pinanganak dod ni Abraham, sampulu woy wawalu on no tuid ka pogkabaybayari rin to soin no dalu no nigligkat ki Satanas. Og-insa a ko kono no goinawa now to ogkabawian sikandin to igkabaybayari rin kuntoon, agad to Allow ta to Oghimoloy?” kagi ni Hisus.
Ko ogkasagboka-an kid on, ogparagas kid to tu-tu-u no ogdatongan ta.
Ko du-on ogsamo-on ta no ogboni-on, ogpulù ki diò to ilis ka maroyow no ogkabonì.
labot
Pogkouma ran dio to nigsabalan, nigkita ran to noonsig on ka batu no ingkalokob to bo-bo to pigsabalan no
Abolonga nu ka tambal.
No nonoulugan on ka mgo otow to dagdakol woy mabogat no magakinomu no uran no nigligkat to langit. No songo kuwo ko ogkoumaan to kalimmaan no kilu ka tag manalingboka. Di ka mgo otow, ogpanungayawon dan ka Magboboot su ligkat to sikan no magakinomu no uran no ogdagsang kandan woy su lagboy ogkohirapan to sikan no igkabaybayari ran.
Ka miow, ko og-uma ka poghagal dan, ungod ogngiaw-ngiaw ko mausilom on.
Mgo sulod, kono tad on ogtuuan ka tibo no mgo nangnangonon no ogligkat dio to agad hondoi. Ian su og-awoson to og-ol-ologan ta ka sikan no mgo nangnangonon ko tu-tuu no nigligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot woy ko kono. Ian su mohon-ing ka mgo otow no og-alap-alap to mgo nangnangonon kai to ampow to soini no kalibutan no og-abinon dan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dokad di ubat doka ogkagion dan.
Ogparagas on to ogkagi si Hisus. Kagi rin, “Ko ogpokouma on ka Gimukud to Magboboot, kona a now insoi to agad nokoy. Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu. Ko duon ogbuyuon now to Amoy ku no ogsampitan now ka ngaran ku, ogbogayan kow.
kombong
Nokouma on ka allow no pigbootan on to mgo igbuyag to ogligkat koy on no oghondio to probinsia to Italia. No si Pablo lagkos to duma no mgo napirisu, pigbogoy on dio ki Huliu no ian igbuyag to songo sampangan no sundalu no oghingaranan dan no Sampangan ni Igbuyag Agustu.
limuan
la-ak
solsol
tamo-ing
Tipaki’n sika kayu ko mammara.
Kaniu naan, nigdinog kow on to kagi ku ko nignangonan kud sikaniu no kagi ku, ‘Kono no sikoddi ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan. Di pinohun-a a kandin.’”
No nalugoy pad nig–ugpo si Pablo daruwa ki Birnabi dio to Antiokia no nigdumaruma to mgo otow, no nigtuu ki Hisus.
ki1
labot
Nokoy pad no nokohondio ka sikan no anak no nakaagpot dio to sagboka no otow dio to sikan no ugpaan, no ka sikan no otow, nigsugu kandin dio to kamot din oyow kandin ka ogbantoy to mgo babuy rin.
pungul
Sikan ian no nahan to mgo otow no nokohun-a no nigtalabau no dakoldakol ka igbayad kandan. Di ka bayad dan songo malison no salapi do.
Ka nigga-ani on ka homoy, natalaran ka warò atag no naga-ani, no tibò no otow, nakako-on.
gabas
Pogkapawo, nigbogayan on dut taga Samaria ka tagbanwa to salapi no kagi rin to, ‘Uyamui a pa kai to soini no napalian. Ko songo monu ka subla to gastu nu kandin, ogliwanan ku ro ko oglibong a.’ ”
Mohon-ing uromo ka mgo dinug no daddakol woy mohon-ing ka mgo ugpaan no ogkoumaan to bitil woy ka mgo dalu no ogpakaguo. Duon ogkitoon to mgo otow ko kai pad to tano ka dakol no igkahallok dan no indanan no ligkat dio to langit.
Ko du-on duma ta no matallong ka oghipanow, og-agpas ki no ogdagap ka ogsaponon.
bugkal
No, nokouma ka sagboka no igbuyag to anaranan to mgo og-ampu. Ka ngaran to sikan no igbuyag, si Hairu no niglangkob dio to marani to paa ni Hisus, no nigbuyu din ki Hisus to ogduma kandin dio to baloy rin,
“Nò,” kagi ni Hisus, “Og-insa a kaniu, ko ogpokouma uromo dio to sikan no pinamula ka tagtuun, nokoy ka oghimuon din to sika mgo talagbantoy to pinamula rin?”
Pogkaponga woy ni Pedro to ig–anad dan woy to igmalogot to kinagian to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus, nig–uli on dio to Hirusalim. Mohon–ing ka nigsagpitan dan no mgo lunsud dio to ogkabayaan dan dio to probinsia to Samaria. No innangonnangon dan ka soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus.
Unawa do kaniu, waro ogkagion now no maroyow su maroot ka mgo batasan now. Ogkounawa kow to ulod no oghilu su ogpakoid kow no mgo otow. Ko nokoy ka dio to goinawa now, ian ka oglibuwas dut bo-bo now.
timpa
“No ka sikan no oghimuon to mgo otow kaniu, sikan ian ka pogliw-ak now oyow ogpakanangon kow kandan to Maroyow no Nangnangonon,” kagi ni Hisus.
buyag
Nò, duon ka sagboka no hibatoon ni Hisus no dakol so goinawa rin kandin no dio to longod din ogpinnuu.
Igsayo-sayò noy koykow to no-uli-an koy
Sikanak no si Huan, ogbohog a to tibo no ogdinog to impanoy ignangonnangon to soini no nasulatan. Woy soini ka igbohog ku. Ko duon agad hontow no ogtimul to agad nokoy to soini no nasulatan, songo ogtimulan to Magboboot ka iglogpad kandin no mgo igkabaybayari no ingkasulat kai.
abod
“Ogkounawa ka Gimukud to Magboboot to otow no oggongon to lirong din oyow ig-otap din no ogkalunsod ka otapon woy ka lupogas no oglimuron din ka tirigu dio to pinayag din. Di ka usangon woy ka otapon, ogsilaban din on to hapuy no kono ogkaparongan,” kagi ni Huan.
Ogmaroyow ka goinawa to boi no ogpakaroromdom to pamilia rin di og-usigon din ka asawa rin
Sikan ian to kono kid ogkasipod to ogdani to Magboboot no magaan ogkohoy-u. Ian su oyow ogkohoy-uan kinow rin no ogkabuligan kinow nikandin ko duon kohirapi ta.
di kono a nu og–ongkoran dio to Hadis no ian ka ugpaan to mgo nammatoy, woy su kono ka ogbogoy ko ogkamolu ka lawa ku no ian ka Matuwarong no Suguanon nu.
hab-un
darua no gatus
tobtob
songo pogko-on
Nò, nigtonggak si Hisus no nigkita rin ka mohon-ing lagboy no mgo otow no ogdalapak kandin. Nò, nig-insaan din si Pilipi, “Hondoi ki buwa ogboli to paan no litos no igpakoon ta to soin no mgo otow?”
Nignangon si Hisus to songo pananglitan din. Kagi rin, “Agad hontow kaniu, ko duon suguonon now no ogdaru woy ko duon ogbantoy to ayam nu no karniru, ko og-uli on sikandin no ogligkat to talabau rin, og-inso a kaniu ko ogpokouma sikandin, ko ognangonan nu to, ‘Pinnuu ka; hun-a ka ogkoon?’
Nig-inso ni Simon Pedro ki Hisus, “Buyag, hondoi ka ogdolog?” Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Kono ka pad ogpakasundul,” kagi, “di uromo, ogpakasundul ka ro.”
Di nigtabak a kandan to kono no litos to batasan ta, ka nasakup to gobirnu to Ruma, ko oglogparan ta ka otow no kono pad ogpakatangko to mgo otow no ogbayung kandin su oyow ogpakatabak to sikan no imbayung kandin,” kagi rin.
atoy
Nò, nigsugu ni Hirodis ka sagboka no sundalu rin oyow og-alapon din ka ulu ni Huan no Talagbautismu. Nighondio ka sundalu to pirisuan no nigtampod din ka liog ni Huan
Insikop ka bolad dio’t kandiru.
Di kagi ni Hisus, “Hudas, og-inso a koykow ko ian nu igharok ka igpanabod nu koddi no ian Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan?”
Di kuntoon, ka mgo otow no waro pad mogtuu, ogkabolongbolong kaniu ko manio to kono kow on og-amut kandan to sikan dod no hinimuan dan no ogsubla. Sikan ian ka ligkatan to ogdooton kow ran.
“Nò” kagi ni Hisus, “Ko ogdakopon kow no og-alapon kow dio to tangkaan to mgo igbuyag dio to mgo anaranan to mgo og-ampu woy ko og-alapon kow dio to tangkaan to mgo labow no igbuyag to ugpaan, kono kow ogkasasow ko nokoy ka igtabak now woy ko nokoy ka duma no ogkagion now
Ko sagboka nu ka og-ambò, og-ayunon nu to lawa nu ka bulu. Ka bolad nu, ian nu igbogsoy.
nò
hogod
abu
agoloy
Mgo sulod, duon impasulat to Magboboot dongan, no kagi rin to, “Nokouwang ad on su nigtuu ad.” No sikanami, ogkounawa rod ka pogtuu noy. Sikan ian to songo ogpokouwang koy no ognangonnangon to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon.
poka
Ka an-anayan no nig-in-insaan a dio to tangkaan to mgo igbuyag, waro agad sagboka no nigpangabang kanak. Di noongkoran ad to tibo. Di maroyow ku ko kono og-indanan to Magboboot ka sikan no salo dan.
konò ogka-ayun
Woy nigkagian din ka sikan no hibatoon din to, “Usi, sikandin on ka inoy nu.” Nò man, nigpakiino sikandin no dio on to kandin nig-ugpo ka inoy ni Hisus.
Og-awoson ta to og-unawoon ta ka pogdoromdom ta to pogdoromdom ni Hisu Kristu:
Pogkaponga, nighondio si Birnabi to lunsud to Tarsu su ogpamanghoon din si Saulo.
Ka batò ko ogpako-on no mananoy ogtakas, og-ay-ayaman din ka ko-onon din.
sokod
burut
Dongan no waro pad nohimu ka soini no kalibutan, nig-alam kinow on to Magboboot oyow ogkohimu kinow on no mgo sakup din ligkat to ogkasagboka kinow ki Hisu Kristu. Ian su tuud din to oyow ogmaroyow kinow on dio to tangkaan din no waro igkoogot din kanta.
Ian to soini ka mgo ogkoiniatan ku su oyow ko ogkouyag ad on uromo ligkat to kamatayon ku, ogpokoiman-iman a to ogkabogayan a to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
Ogpasikò ka kayamotan
lambagun
bot
Ko du-on ogsagad no babuy du-on to balatik, ogkabasikal ka bagwanan no ogkapilak on ka babuy no magintalunan.
bulanbulan
No nigsolod on woy si Pablo to anaranan su sikan ka batasan dan. No taman to tatolu no simana, nigmaal–alukuy rin to mgo otow woy ungod din tuona ka Tahan no Kasulatan to kinagian to Magboboot.
Ko og-uma ka dalu no tiklas diò to songo ugpa-an, ko du-on ogpanumbaloy no ogligkat to sikan no ugpa-an, ogka-alapan ki to dalu.
gitas
bagasu
Ko nigdinog din ka tabak to sikan no igbuyag to sundalu, nigbogoy si Pilatu to ogkuo si Husi to lawa ni Hisus.
Nò, tongod to mgo boi no duon on asawa, og-awoson to kono din og-ongkoran ka asawa rin taman to ogkamatoy on ka asawa rin. Di ko ogkamatoy on ka asawa rin, litos ko ogkaasawa on oghutuk to lukos no ogkoiniatan din ko sikan no lukos no ogpangasawa poron kandin, nigtuu on to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
hangos
Omunaan no awoson no ogpaagad-agad kow to agad nokoy no ig-anad dan. Di kono kow og-unug to oghimuon dan, su kono dan ian oghimuon ka kandan no ig-anad.
Di sikaniu mgo sulod no igdakoli ku to goinawa, og-awoson no ogmabubuligoy kow oyow ogkohogot ka pogtuu now to Magboboot. Ko og-ampu ki, ogpabulig ki to Gimukud to Magboboot ko nokoy ka ogkaampuan ta.
No ka mgo bogas to ubas, dio din pogoa to libuwasan to sikan no lunsud. No langosa ka nigtulalug ligkat to pogoanan. No ka sikan, nohimu on no lanog. Songo dopa ka karalomi rin. No tatolu no gatus woy kawaan no kilumitru ka kaluagi rin.
kogang
Nò mgo sulod, ogbuyu a kaniu oyow og-iling kow kanak to songo nig-ilingan ku sikaniu to waro kow masakup to mgo Balaod ni Moisis. No ko nig-ugpo a pad dio to kaniu nokani, waro salo now kanak.
babalakan
Du-on otow no ogpamanghò to ogkarigarolon din su kawa-anno saku ka agoloy rin no warò ogkatambang to ogpalawod to gakit din.
Di pogdatong to mgo suguonon din dio to pinamula, niglamposan to mgo talagbantoy ka sagboka, nighimatayan dan ka dangob, woy nigdogpak dan to batu ka dangob no suguonon.
Di nigtabak si Pedro daruwa ki Huan kandan to, “Mgo amoy, doromdoma now ko hondoi ka maroyow to tangkaan to Magboboot, ko ogpaagad–agad koy ro kaniu di ogkabalagad noy on ka sugu to Magboboot kanami.
komod
Ka ilaw no kurinti ko ogka-awò ka layag din ogkaparonga.
Ogdanntoy on ka allow ko ogliu on to bubungan ka ogsalop on
No songo nigsagman ka napulid kandan su nokoiman to duon buwa igbogoy ran kandin.
agpiring
Matubung ki kunto-on
Nò, duon darua no otow no nabutud no nigpinpinnuu dio to ilis to dalan. To nigdinog dan to ogligad si Hisus, nigbabansagon no kagi ran to, “Wow pinanganak ni Dabid, kohoy-ui koy bag.”
laban
Tilo-tò on ka uran.
“Agad hontow kaniu, ko pananglitan duon ayam now no mgo karniru no songo gatus, ko ogkalagak ka sagboka, ogmonuon now? Ogkagalat now naan do ka kasiaman woy sasiam no ayam now dio to pigsabukan to mgo ayam now no dio to awayan, no oghipanow kow no ogpamangho to ayam now no nalagak. Woy kow on oghagtong no ogpamangho ko ogkitoon now on.
nipis
bolok
Kagi pa ni Hisus, “Ko dio pad to holholawan nighihipanow woy si Moisis, in-ampow rin ka ulod no nohimu to boronsi dio ampow to malayat no tukod Ogkounawa ian koddi no oghingaranan a to Kakoy to Koot-otawan. Songo igpaampow a dio to krus no songo oglindogon.
turoy
Di ko duon otow no kono ogtuman to sugu to Magboboot di ognangonnangon to, “Ogdumaruma a to Magboboot,” ubaton ka sikan no otow, no ka tu-tuu no nangnangonon, waro makatagu to goinawa rin.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ko hondoi dapit ka igkaratu now, songo dio ka goinawa now.”
atigbun
Pogkaponga, nigkagian ni Hisus ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad, woy ka mgo igbuyag to talagbantoy to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu woy ka mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu no ogdakopon dan sikandin. Kagi ni Hisus, “Manio to og-alap kow to mgo moirob mgo kayu no iglampos? Bak takawon a!
doyow
Pogkaponga,” kagi ni Istiban, “no nighipanow on si Abraham ligkat to sikan no ugpaan din to Kaldia no nighalin on dio to lunsud to Haran. Pogkalugoy no namatoy on ka amoy ni Abraham, no pighutuk man do pahalina to Magboboot sikandin to pog–ugpo din kai to soini no tano no ogkougpaan now ta kuntoon.
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Kono nu ibogoy to asu ka kasangkapan to Magboboot su nampa ko ogkagaton ka buwa. Woy songo kono now ibogoy to babuy ka mahal no baliog su ogdiokdiokan dan do soini.”
Ka ambotut, oghondiò ki to ampow.
No sikanta, mgo sulod, no pig-abin on ni Hisu Kristu, ogkounawa to impalansang tad ka maroot no goinawa ta woy ka mgo maroot no igkoibog ta dio to krus ni Hisus su nig-iniugan tad on.
Ian su ogkoomonu naan ka sikan no igbuyag to og-alap to mgo otow no ogtuu ki Hisu Kristu ko kono ogkatou sikandin no og-alap to kandin no pog-aalunggun?
Ko napawo on, nighipanow on sikandan. Ko diad to dalan nigligad sikandan to sikan no kayu no igira. Ko nigkita ran, nagangu on ka tibo puun to uud no taman to dio to dalig, nagangu on.
Di nigkagi ka inoy, "Amana so-i batò no konò ogka-awa-an to ig-apul din."
Ko ogmarakdakoloy to goinawa to duma ta, songo du-on goinawa kanta sikan ka ma-am-amanoloy
to-i
Ka sikan no allow, nabogayan si Hisus to igkarago din no nigpuun to Gimukud to Magboboot, no kagi rin, “Amoy ku no Magboboot dio to Langit woy kai to tano, ogpasalamatan ku sikoykow su ka soini no inholos nud dongan dio to duon natouanan dan, ian nu ro pasabuta ka mgo otow no molintok do bag so natouan dan. Hoo, Amoy ku, su sikan ian ka pogboot nu no igkoiniat nu.”
Nataga kow to mgo koiniatan to Magboboot woy nataga kow rod ko nokoy ka litos no oghimuon now su naanad kow to Balaod din no impasulat din ki Moisis.
butiti
Di nigdugsuan do to sagboka no sundalu ka kiliran ni Hisus to kommag din oyow ogkatagaan din ko namatoy on. To pogdugsu kandin, nakalibuwas ka langosa woy woig ligkat to kiliran din.
Agad ogmonuon dan to ognangon kaniu, kono kow ogtuu to sikan no ubat no kagi ran, su woy ro ogpakatood ka sikan no allow to poglibong to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta ko ogkatuman on to mohon-ing ka mgo otow no og-atu to Magboboot. Woy duon ogkakitaan on no otow no labow to poglop-ang to Balaod to Magboboot. Nabootan on sikandin to ogkalogparan on sikandin to waro katamanan.
lurus
iì
otuwoy
Ogtu-ugon ka damolugan no igpako-on to batò no igbano-ulì to ogmagasò.
banulaloy
no-u
bibi
Nò, manio to wa nu kohoy-ui ka duma nu no suguanon unawa to pogkohoy-u ku koykow?’
Patabok nu ka losung su og-uranan.
Ka mgo balubato woy ka mgo dalaga, ko du-on ogko-imaan no bali-og woy ko binuklad woy ko tikos, maga-an ogbuyu.
Og-iniugan dan ka tu-tuu ian no tinuuan. No ian dan do ogpamminogon ka mgo nangnangonon no kono no tu-tuu.
bulas
salap
Hop-at no libu ka mgo lukos no nakakoon. Waro nakalagkos pogsool ka mgo boi woy ka mgo bato no nakakoon.
gayad
Og-andung ki. Pamminog ki to kinagian to igbuyag.
Kono now kalingawi soini, agad hontow no otow no ogpoinum to agad songo basu ro no woig no mahagsil to sakup ku su sakup ku sikandin, ogkabogayan sikandin to igsayo puun to Magboboot.”
untung
Ko nakarinog si Igbuyag Hirodis to kagi to mgo otow, kagi rin to “Si Huan no Talagbautismu ian. Nigpatamporan kud ka liog din di nootawan man do.”
gastu
No poglibuwas woy ni Pablo to pirisuan, nighondio to baloy ni Lidia woy namanoik on. No pogkita ran to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus, nig–os–osonan dan sikandan. Pogkaponga, nighipanow on woy si Pablo.
hawi
panombù
Nabunsuran to igsunù to songo simana.
Waro do malugoy no ka Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu no si Agripa woy ka atoboy rin no si Birnisi, nighondio to Sisaria su ogkumustoon dan si Gobirnador Pistu.
ulu
Igparinog ta ko nokoy ka ignangon ta.
Nigkita kud soini,” kagi ni Huan, “woy ognangonan ku sikaniu to soini ka Anak to Magboboot.”
No innangon to Magboboot ki Abraham to uromo, ogkaawo kinow to katondanan to mgo usig ta, mgo igkahallok ta to oyow ogkohimu no ogtuman ki to mgo koiniatan to Magboboot,
noy
agoloyan
Ogmataloytoy, matul-id woy ma-awang ka pogsabut ta.
Di warad on ka pogsalig ku to sikan no Balaod su tongod to sikan, ogkounawa to namatoy ad su warad on ka pog-iman-iman ku to ogkapangabangan ad to pogtuman ku to sikan no Balaod, su og-awoson ku to ogpokounug a to tibo no goinawa to Magboboot.
Og-awoson to ogkatimul ka pogsabut now to sikan no ingkaanad kaniu tongod ki Hisu Kristu no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy Talagpangabang kanta. No ka sikan no pogsabut, ogligkat to pogkohoy-u rin kanta. No ligkat kuntoon taman to waro katamanan, ogsayoon tanow si Hisu Kristu. Malogot ian.
Ka an-anayan no diwata to Magboboot, nighiup din ka bungag no niggongonan din, nig-uranan ka tano to magakinomu no uran woy nalagkosan to hapuy no nasolugan to langosa. Pogdagsang to sikan, nanasilaban on ka igkatatolu no baad to tano, lagkos to songo nasilaban ka igkatolu no baad to mgo kayu. Woy nasilaban on ka tibo no mgo makamos no pangamuton.
abalang
lakbang
ugtu
Di ka tibo no ogsalig porom to pogtuman dan to Balaod su nahan dan no ian ka ogpakamaroyow kandan, nigbobootan on tahan to oglogparan to waro katamanan. Ian su duon impasulat dongan no nigkagi to, “Agad hontow no kono ogpakatuman to tibo no innangon to Balaod to Magboboot, ogkabobootan sikandan to ogkalogparan on to waro katamanan.”
ugpa-an
Nò, su nohimu kinow on no mgo anak to Magboboot, og-awoson to ogpaagad-agad kinow to innangon din. No kono kid on ogtuman to mgo maroot no koiniatan ta no nigpaagad-agaran ta nokani to waro ki pad mataga to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon tongod ki Hisu Kristu.
sukut
Si Jeany no anak ku, no-ulug to santol.
ponod
tibo soini no mgo otow marusilom on ka pogdoromdom dan. Di uromo ogkitoon dan on ka ogpakabat-ow to goinawa ran. Sikandan no og-uugpo do to sika marusilom taman to ogkamatoy sikandan, duon on ogpakabat-ow to dalan dan.”
kalamag
Paragasa now, mgo sulod, ka pog-ampu now kanami. Nataga koy to maawang ka goinawa noy su ian tuud noy to oghimu to maroyow.
utu-utu
Ian su ko ogpaalap ki to igkoibog to lawa ta, ian ta ogkapurut ka kamatayon ta no waro katamanan. Di ko ogpaboot og-unug ki to Gimukud to Magboboot, ian ta ogkapurut ka kouyagan ta no waro katamanan.
lialia
Ogpatigda-an to kagi. Ogkabonalan on. Konò ogpakatabak ka otow.
Nokoy so’gtolunon nu dutun ko du-on talabau nu kai?
Ko og-uma ka dalu no tiklas diò to songo ugpa-an, ko du-on ogpanumbaloy no ogligkat to sikan no ugpa-an, ogka-alapan ki to dalu
utas
Kayu no ogtigbasan no oglangosa ka lawa.
Ko ogpasalamat a to Magboboot to duon ka sikan no sapu, manio naan to ogmarooton a to songo otow to sikan no ngalap no impasalamat kud?” Ian ka inso din.
Ian su ka mgo otow no nohimu on no anak din, ogmanokal on su ligkat to pogsalig dan ki Hisus. No kono dan ogkatuman ka mgo maroot no batasan to soini no kalibutan.
Ogka-agkapan ka og-ugpò to sikan no ugpa-an; ogkohonat ka tibò no oghalin su du-on igkahallok.
Nò, sagboka ro ka unturanan to pogtuu ta di mohon-ing ka ogkohimu no ighimu ta to lawa to baloy. Pananglitan, ko ian ta ighimu ka kono ogkasilaban unawa to bulawan, woy ko plata, woy ko mgo mahal no batu, woy ko ighimu ta atag ka ogkasilaban unawa to kayu, kalan woy ko mgo lagut.
hawi
tangkò
Du-on allow no nigsulungan a to darua no tabu-uan no nigtokow nigsogod koddì.
Sikan ian no pigsokod dan ko songo monu karalom ka woig. Pogkaponga, pigdopa ran no kawaan do no dopa ka karaloman to woig. Waro do malugoy no nighutuk dan on sokora ka woig no sampulu woy lalimma ro no dopa ka karaloman.
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Hoo, koddi ian. Sikoddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan, ogkitoon a now no ogpinnuu dio to kawanan to Magboboot no nabogbogan no duon dakol no kabogbogan ku. Woy ogkitoon a now no ogpokountud to mgo gapun ko oglibong a dini to soin no kalibutan.”
immow
Nigtabak si Hisus kandin to, “Duon ian otow no nigsamsam koddi su niggoram ku to duon niglibuwas no kabogbogan no nigpuun kai to koddi.”
Dokad di, nohoy-uan ad on to Magboboot su to waro a pad mootow, pig-abin ad on to Magboboot no oyow, pogkalugoy, ogkohimu ad on no suguanon din. Impapitow rin kanak ka Anak din no si Hisu Kristu oyow ogpakanangonnangon a to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu to tibo no pighimu ni Hisus kanta. No ka nohimu to sikan, waro a nigpaanad to agad hontow.
Ka mgo kabogbogan no igbogoy to Gimukud to Magboboot, ogloinloin. Di sagboka ro sikandin no talagpambogoy.
kuron
Tumupan to og-insò
Nigtabak si Hisus, “Ko ogpatahud ku ka koddi no ngaran, waro pulus to sikan igtahud koddi. Di ka Amoy ku ka ogsayo koddi no sikandin kun ka Magboboot now.
Di nigbabansagon ni Pedro no kagi rin, “Agad darua ki ka oghimatayan dan, kono ku igholos sikoykow.” Uunawa ka kagi to tibo no mgo hibatoon din.
Waro do mogbuloy no duon on tatolu no otow no nigdatong dio to baloy no nig–ugpaan ku. Mgo taga Sisaria sikandan no pigsugu kai to kanak to Hupi,” kagi ni Pedro.
Di magaan mataga si Hisus dio to kandin no goinawa to nokoy ka duon to goinawa to mgo talag-anad no pig-inso din sikandan to, “Manio naan to ogsumansuman kow to unawa to soini?
Ian su waro otow no ogkohimu on no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot ko ligkat to ogdinog do duon to Balaod din, su ko duon otow no ogsalig to pogtuman din poron to Balaod, woy ro ogmaroyow sikandin ko ogpakatood sikandin no ogtuman to tibo no Balaod din.
Kono ogkabanggutan ka sikan no otow to agad hondoi no otow. Malasi bangguti ka mgo bolad din to karina woy ka paa rin to igpakagat no putow. Di ka karina ogbigtawon din woy ka putow dut paa rin nigdokdok din to batu no songo nabigtow on. Agad hondoi no otow, waro ogpakabakus kandin.
Ko konò kow ogtamong, pamanghò kow to ogkako-on.
Pogpitow ku man do to sikan no Nati no Karniru no nigloko din on ka igkohon-om no imparokot to sikan no ogbasoon. Sikan do ian no duon maagbot lagboy no dinug woy nigmoitom on ka allow no ogkounawa to moitom no manggad. Woy nigmalalab on ka bulan no ogkounawa to langosa.
Ka otow no du-on masakit to goinawa, ogpohiroson to goinawa rin oyow ogka-aguanta din ka igkabayò din no koirapi.
Woy ogtabak sikandan to, ‘Buyag, kon-u noy sikoykow kitaa no niggutasan ka, woy ko namaaran kad woy ko magaliug ka dio to kanami no wa noy sagmana woy waro kinabo nu no waro noy sikoykow kinaboi?’
bongkag
“Buyag,” kagi to sikan no boi, “Bogayi a nud to sikan no woig oyow kona ad on ogkoibog no og-inum woy oyow kona ad on oglibong kai to ogsakaru.”
Ka amoy ni Kainan, si Inos. Ka amoy ni Inos, si Sit. Ka amoy ni Sit, si Adan, no ka amoy ni Adan, ka Magboboot.
Ko og-aanad pad, nigduma to mgo talag-anad to Balaod dan woy ka mgo Parisiu ka songo boi no nakitaan no oghulid to kono no asawa rin. Impasasindog dan ka sikan no boi dio to taliwaro to mgo otow.
Ka bulbul ni Igì, lagboy no mo-itom.
dugsù
Nighutuk nigsolod si Pilatu to dakol no baloy rin no pinarani rin on si Hisus. Nig-inso si Pilatu ki Hisus to, “Koykow ka Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu?”
Ogtatagad ka soin no mgo otow to ogkasiu-siu ka woig su oghondio to sikan no woig ka songo diwata no suguanon to Magboboot no ogkasiuan din ka woig. Di waro mataga ka mgo malotoy ko kon-u ogpokouma ka diwata. Nò, ka sika an-anayan no otow no oglogsad dio to woig no ogkasiu on, ogkoulian on ka sikan no otow, agad nokoy ka dalu rin.
“No ko ogdinog kow to duon mgo gira woy mgo samuk kai to kalibutan, kono kow ogkahallok su og-awoson to ogkatuman ka mgo gira, di kono pad ogdatong ka mohuri no allow kai to tano.”
No duon boi dio no nigdaralu, no ka dalu rin, nigpuun to busow. Sampulu on woy wawalu no tuid ka poggoram din. Napoku ka poka rin no kono ogkatul-id.
aput
Masalig si Hisus no ogtuman to tibo no insugu to Magboboot no ian nig-alam kandin. Ka sikan, ogkounawa ki Moisis no songo masalig dongan to pog-alap din to pogpangatondanan to mgo pinanganak ni Israil no pigtokod to Magboboot.
Dio to Amoy ku duon mohon-ing so ogkougpaan. Oghun-a ad dio su ogpanagana a to datongan now. Ko kono pa porom no malogot soini, kono ku porom ognangonan sikaniu.
tampod
ula-an
No niglangob si Isaias to nignangon to kinagian to Magboboot to: “Nakitaan a to mgo otow no waro mamangho kanak. No ka mgo otow no waro nig-insoinso kanak, impasabut ku kandan ko hontow a.”
Ko nigligkat dio si Hisus mgo hibatoon din nigparagasdagas no waro nigsagpit dio to mgo lunsud to Galilia. Kono ogkoiniat si Hisus to ogkatagataga ka mgo otow ko hondoi ran ogdolog
batu
baluy
Di sikaniu, atag, mgo sulod, kono kow ogpapopogul no oghimu to maroyow.
dalig
kolkol
Nigkagian ni Hisus sikandan to, “Duma kow koddi su og-anaron ku sikaniu ko ogmonuon now to og-alap to mgo otow kai to koddi oyow ogkohimu sikandan no mgo sakup ku.”
Nò, pogkapawo niglibong woy si Hisus dio to lunsud to Hirusalim. Poghipanow ran niggutasan si Hisus.
Pogkarani ran on to gumawan to lunsud, natagbu ran ka mgo otow no niglolong to namatoy. Ka lukos no namatoy, bugtung no anak to sagboka no nabalu no boi. Mohon-ing ka mgo otow no nigligkat to lunsud no nigduma to inoy to namatoy.
lungag
Ka mako-on, oglituk to dakol ka ogkako-on kai to Nasuli woy to warò bitil.
tinanow
“Ayad-ayad kow oyow kono kow ogkagawayan to mgo ubaton no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no ogpokouma dio to ugpaan now. Ian su ko ogkitoon ta sikandan malomu sikandan no ogkounawa to sikan no ayam no karniru di ka malogot no goinawa ran ogkounawa ian to magintalunan no asu no oggawayan din poron ka sika ayam no karniru oyow ogkoonon din.
to oyow ogmaroyow ro ka pog-ugpo now woy to oyow ogkabogayan kow to malayat no pog-ugpo now kai to ampow to soini no tano.”
Nokani no waro ki pad nigtuu, nigpaagad-agad kinow rod to mgo tahan no koiniatan to lawa ta. No ko nataga ki to sikan no insapad to Balaod to Magboboot, natimtimulan do duon ka pogtuman ta to mgo maroot no ogkoiniatan ta no kono no litos din. No ka ogkoumaan ta poron to sikan, ka kamatayon ta no waro katamanan.
Di waro nigtabak ka mgo otow. Sikan do ian no niggongonan ni Hisus ka otow no nigbawian din on. Pogkaponga ni Hisus, pinohipanow rin on sikandin.
Ko du-on ogkito-on ta no duma ta no warò ta pad tila-a, ma-agkap so goinawa ta kandin.
No ka sikan no kinagian to Magboboot, ingkasulat dongan tongod ki Abraham to nighingaranan on sikandin to maroyow dio to tangkaan din. No kono do no si Abraham ka ogkabuligan to sikan no ingkasulat.
basbas
Kono tad og-atangan ka Gimukud to Magboboot.
Nigkagi si Hisus to dangob no pananglitan. Ko duon manokal no otow no og-alap-alap to panganiban din to ogbantoy to baloy rin, kono ogkatakow ka kandin no kalaglagan. Di ko duon oglopow no mamanokal no otow no ogkaroog ka tagbanwa no ogpuruton din ka panganiban to tagbanwa no nigsaligan din poron no ogpanlogob din ka sika tinakow rin to mgo duma rin.
Mahagsil ian dio no nigtotomog to uling ka mgo suguonon to sikan no igbuyag woy ka sikan no mgo talagbantoy. Dio ogmanhinarang. Nò, songo oghinarang si Pedro dio to longod dan.
pugi
Pogkaponga ni Hisus to impananglitan din, nighipanow sikandin no oghondio to lunsud to Hirusalim no nighun-a sikandin to mgo otow.
Sikan ian to niglogparan ka mabantug no lunsud to Babilunia su dio nigtulalug ka mgo langosa to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot woy ka mgo sakup din woy to tibo no mgo otow no nighimatayan kai to kalibutan.”
Noinuinu lagboy ka mgo otow no nakakita to nakakagi on ka mgo omaw, woy nabawian on ka mgo noumil, woy nokohipanow on ka mgo napulid, woy nakakita on ka mgo nabutud. Nigsayo dan ka Magboboot no ian ka Magboboot to mgo kapunganan ni Israil.
Ogsayoon ku si Hisu Kristu no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no nigbogoy kanak to dayagang to oyow ogpakatood a no oghimu to soini no insugu din. Ian su nigdoromdom sikandin to litos a rin no ogkasaligan, no sikan ian to nighimu a rin no suguanon din.
komol to lakun
Ka aboy, du-on konon sayop woy du-on sayop.
Ko ogko-ubus din on to pogbus-ug to batu, ogko-ug-ug on.
Di dongan, atag, ko nighimu to Magboboot ka soin no kalibutan, nighimu rin ka otow no pinogsangi din to lukos woy boi. Sikan ian ka inkasulat to kinagian to Magboboot.
Warad otow, warad ogdinogon ta no ogkakagi.
Sikan ian, agad ko ogmohirap ka pog-ugpo ta, woy ko duon samuk woy ko duon mgo otow no ogbayadbayad kanta, waro agad nokoy no ogpakaatang kanta to dakol no pogkohoy-u ni Hisu Kristu. Agad ko ogkoumaan ki to bitil, woy ko waro sabinit ta, woy ko oghisakitan ki woy ko oghimatayan ki, kono kinow ogkoolotan to dakol no goinawa rin kanta.
Ogdooton dan ka duma ran, og-usigon dan ka Magboboot woy ogdoogdoogon dan ka agad hontow. Ogparakoldakol sikandan woy ogmarayandayan. Moiria sikandan to ogdoromdom ko nokoy man do no maroot ka oghimuon dan. Woy kono ogpaagad-agad to inoy ran woy ko ka amoy ran.
To nokouma ka diwata no suguanon to Magboboot dio ki Maria, kagi rin, “Karago ka, Maria, su ogduma ka Magboboot koykow.”
pulid
Pogligad pad to sampulu no tuid woy hop-at, niglibong ad dio to Hirusalim no si Birnabi ka duma ku. Songo nigduma kud si Titu.
Ko mahapun on lagboy, nigkagian din ka mgo hibatoon din. Kagi, “Og-untud ki to balutu su oghondio ki to dohipag to lanow.”
timpu
buntit
ngilu
dulit
Ko ogkatokow ki to ogkapolod ka otow no ogparagas dò to ogkamatoy, sikan ka napotung.
totod
balu
Nò, duon nokouma no lukos no niglolongan to mgo duma rin. Ka sikan no otow, nokohibat do duon to hibatanan din su kono oggoram ka lawa rin. Nò, igpamangho to mgo otow ko hondoi ran igpabayo su ogpasoloron dan poron ka otow no piglolongan dan su dio dan poron ipohibat to tangkaan ni Hisus.
tu-an
Nò, ko oglopow kow to sikan no baloy, kagii now ka tagbanwa, ‘Ogkohoy-uan kow to Magboboot’ no ogkabogayan sikandan to Magboboot to karoyawan dan su pigpalopow kow nikandan dio to baloy ran. Di ko kono kow ogpalopowon to baloy ran, hawia now ka impanagataga now.
lingkosu
Nò, ka mgo otow no ogkatou to oghusoy to mgo duma ran, ian dan ogkounawaan ka ogpamula to boni. No ka igpamula ran ka maroyow no pogdumaruma ta no ian ka ogkagaani ka matuwarong no mgo batasan.
Ogsogod to kuddò; o-opus ka ogsakoy
galang
Ko du-on otow no nakasalò no ogdakopon ta, ogkagi ki to, “Konò kad og-atu su no-upul kad on no nalingutan kad on.”
Sikan ian no waro noy maaguanta ka igkasampot noy kaniu, nigpaginggalat koy to oyow ogkoongkoran koy kai to Atinas,
Du-on otow no nigkita to patiukan no ogtu-onon din ka duma rin.
ka-ap-apu-an
Dokad di ko ogdatongan kow on to Gimukud to Magboboot, ogbogayan kow on to kabogbogan, no oghimuon kow on no mgo talagmalogot to igpaanad ku kai to soini no lunsud to Hirusalim, woy dio to tibo to sikan no probinsia to Hudia woy dio to Samaria, woy dio to katamanan to soini kalibutan.”
buguk
Niglingi-lingi ni Hisus kandan no naminpinnuu no marani kandin no kagi rin, “Soini ka inoy ku, mgo hari ku su agad hontow, ko ogtuman to igsugu to Magboboot, sikandan ka hari ku, woy ataboy ku woy inoy ku.” Ian ka kagi ni Hisus kandan.
Parayagon ka batò
Tigbal no dongan do to sikan, no si Hirodis ka ian Labow no Igbuyag dan dio to Hirusalim, pigbunsuran din on to ogpambayadbayad to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus.
Kagi to mgo Hudiu, “Umba bag ian sikoykow nò! Kahop-atan no tuid woy hon-om ka poghimu noy to soin no Dakol no Ampuanan. No sikoykow atag, tatolu ro bag no allow ka poghimu nu oghutuk? Ka ku kow!”
hulalì
ulat
Pogdinog to soin no lukos to soin no kagi, nigloin on ka langlangawan din no nighipanow on no masakit lagboy so goinawa rin su datu lagboy sikandin.
“Nokoy no mgo sugu?” ka inso to otow. Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin to, “Kono ka ogbunu woy kono ka ogpanlibug woy kono ka ogpanakow woy kono ka og-uubat ko ogtitigus ka.
Dokad di, to poghimu to Magboboot to lawa ta, nigtapid din ka mgo igsumpul ko nokoy ka goinawa rin to nighimu.
Ogpamalosigsig ka langlanguwan to sikan no ogpinpinnuu, no ogkounawa to mgo mahal no batu no oghingaranan to haspi woy ka kurnalina. Woy ka pinnuuanan din, nalingotan to balangow. No ka batok to balangow, moilow no ogkounawa to moilow no batu no oghingaranan to ismiralda.
To moinit on ka allow, magaan do ogkalanos su manipis ka tano no waro nig-ugsub ka mgo dalig din.
No nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Malogot ka ignangon ku kaniu. Ko duon otow, agad hontow, no og-ongkod to baloy rin, woy ko asawa rin, woy ko hari mgo kakoy rin, woy ko amoy rin mgo inoy rin woy ko mgo anak din su ligkat to nigpasakup sikandin to Pogsugu to Magboboot,
Ko sika otow, kara marusilom, oghirogo woy ko maallow, og-onow woy ogparagas to oghimuon din. Ka sikan no boni pad, ogpandagom woy ogtulin di kono ogpakasabut ka sikan no otow ko ogkoomonu ka sika no boni to ogtulin.
hagkuy
Mgo sulod, ko duon ogtuu dio to kaniu no ogpakasuwoy to tu-tuu ian no tinuuan, di ko duon otow no ogbulig kandin to oyow og-oson to goinawa rin,
bangalug
Di duon dod duma no mgo otow no nighondio to mgo Parisiu woy nignangon to pighimu ni Hisus.
Nighondio sikandin no ognangon to mgo sakup ni Hisus no ogsinsinogow sikandan no masakit lagboy so goinawa ran.
Ligkat to pogtuu ni Isaak, nigpakohoy-uan din to Magboboot ka mgo anak din no si Hakub woy si Isau.
ulat
gaapun
posol
Pogkita ni Hisus sikandan, nig-umow rin sikandan oyow ogdumoon din sikandan. No, ingalat dan ka amoy ran duon to balutu duma to sikan no mgo binayaran no nigduma on ki Hisus.
gatus
Dakol woy matangkawal no manuk ka kamiara.
Ka otow no balungilit, maga-an ogpakangisi ko ogpakakita to duma rin. Layun ogma-awang ka goinawa rin. Ogko-iling to warò igkasasow.
bangan
Pogdinog ni Pilatu to sikan no kagi to mgo taga Hudia, nig-inso din to, “Taga Galilia ka soin no lukos?”
Di agad hontow, waro mataga to allow woy ko oras no oglibong ka Kakoy to Tibon Koot-otawan. Waro mataga ka diwata to Magboboot; waro mataga ka anak to Magboboot. Ka Magboboot no Amoy ro ka ogkataga to poglibong din.
Nighondio woy si Hisus to Bitsaida. Ko nokouma on sikandan, duon mgo otow dio no nigduma ran ka sagboka no nabutud no lukos no nigbuyu dan ki Hisus no ogsamsamon din ka mata rin.
asukal
Di ka innangon ku, kono no ka mgo otow no maroot so batasan dan no waro nigtuu no kai to soini no kalibutan, no oggogolgol to kalaglagan, woy ko ogpanakow, woy ko og-ampu to mgo inotow-otow. Ian su, ko sikan pa ka ignangon ku, ogpakaawo kinow ro duon to soini no tano.
Nò, kai man do ogkakagi dio to tangkaan to mgo otow di waro agad sagboka no ogsapad kandin. Nataga buwa ka mgo igbuyag ta to soini ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan.
Nokoy ka ignangon ta? Ko dakol ka pogkohoy-u to Magboboot kanta, og-inso a ko maroyow ko ogparagason ta ro ka maroot no mgo batasan ta oyow ogkatimulan do ka pogkohoy-u rin kanta?
Duon dod duma no otow no nigtugunan to Igbuyag no nigbakus dan ka mgo suguanon woy niglamposan dan sikandan, woy nighimatayan dan sikandan.
Ka otow diò to kanami no poguon, ogngaranan noy no na-agok no otow su warò nato-uan no talabao. Du-on ogkato-uan din di konò oggamiton.
Ka dangob no tuud noy to ogsulat kaniu su oyow ogdakol on ka igkarago tanow.
puntuk
atoganan
Og-ampu a to Magboboot to oyow ungod kow ogpadakdakoloy to goinawa woy to oyow songo ogkatimulan ka katagaanan now to tu-tuu ian woy ka pogkasabuti now
Ka kindi ka ig-ayat ta to batò no ogsinogow.
Di waro nig-utong dio to goinawa ran. Ko ogkoumaan sikandan to samuk woy igkabaybayari ran su nigtuu sikandan to Magboboot, no og-ongkoran dan on ka pogtuu ran.
Di, taman kuntoon, nigbuligan ad to Magboboot. Sikan ian to kai a to tangkaan nu su ogkaparagas ku ka ignangonnangon ku dio to agad hontow, ko mabantug woy ka kono no bantug. No ka sikan, nig–un–unawa ro to sikan no impanoy innangon ni Moisis woy to duma no mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan.
Ka otow no ogbanta-an pad, tigbal din pad ogdoromdom no diò ogkamot sikandin to mamatosan no mgo latì.
Di ka mgo taga Antiokia no nigtuu on ki Hisus, narago–dago on ka goinawa ran to pogtuu ran ki Hisus, woy nigpaboot lagboy sikandan to Gimukud to Magboboot.
Ko tongod to baloy no og-awos to ogmatikangon, og-alikan to nanoynanoy su awos to ogsongolan.
Mohon-ing dod ka in-anad ni Huan to mgo otow tongod to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon din kandan no awoson no ogtumanon dan ka innangon din.
takang
Di sikaniu atag, agad ka mgo sulod now to pogtuu, ogbaybayaran now woy oglukuon now rod.
Ka agaayan, tibò dò no agoloy sikan.
Sikan ian no nigsasindog si Pilipi woy nighipanow on. Pogkalugoy no duon nabayaan din no otow no taga Itiopia no nigsakoy to kalisa. Dakol ka ngaran to sikan no otow su ian ka ogtalipun to mgo salapi to igbuyag dan no boi no oghingaranan dan ki Kandas. Ka sikan no taga Etiopia, dio mogligkat to Hirusalim. No ian din inhondio su oyow ogsimba. No kuntoon to pog–uli din, duon pigbasa rin no ingkasulat dongan to talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no si Isaias.
duma
doson
gulak
Ka kimud, kandin ka katamanan no anak; konad og-anak oghutuk.
Soini no nangnangonon noy kaniu, nigligkat dio ki Hisus. No ka innangon din kanami no songo ignangon noy kaniu tongod to Magboboot to waro tagu no agad nokoy no maroot dio to kandin. Tibo dio to kandin, kaawangan.
Ian su tibo kinow, ogpakatangko ki Hisu Kristu uromo no ogbobootan kinow nikandin ko nokoy ka nohimu ta ko maroyow woy ko maroot. No ogbogayan ki nikandin to litos to sikan no nohimu ta ko kai ki pad to tano.
Kohop-atan din on no allow dio no ungod og-ol-ologi ni Satanas to ogpakasalo poron. No si Hisus, waro nigkoon to agad nokoy taman to nokouma ka kohop-atan no allow. Pogkaponga, niggutasan on sikandin.
Ogkoiniatan noy to magaan ogkatuman ka Pogsugu nu kai to soin no kalibutan. Ogkatuman ka koykow no pogboot kai to soin no tano no unawa to songo natuman dio to Langit.
hanggol
boglow
pinnu-u
lipung
ila
Og-ampuan ku sikandan tibo oyow ko ogtuu on sikandan, ogkasagboka ro so lawa ran. Ka goinawa ku to sikandan woy sikanta, Amo, salupungan kinow no ogkounawa to kanta, salupungan kid. Sikan ka goinawa ku to salupungan sikandan oyow ogtuu ka mgo waro pad nigtuu to nigsugu a nud.
Nò, su ian do ogpakamaroyow kanta dio to tangkaan to Magboboot ka pogtuu ta ki Hisus, do kow ogsumansuman to warad on buwa pulus ka dongan no Balaod to Magboboot, su ligkat to pogtuu ta ki Hisus, madmaroyow atag ka pogtuman ta to sikan no Balaod.
panurì
koykayasin
Di ko ogpakakagi pa ka mata ta, kono ogkohimu ko ognangonan din ka bolad to, “Kono ku og-awoson sikoykow.” Woy ko ogpakakagi pa ka ulu ta, kono songo ogkohimu ko ognangonan din ka paa to, “Kono ku og-awoson sikaniu.”
Nigdinog now ka kagi ku to oghipanow a pad di oglibong a ro kai to kaniu. Ko duon goinawa now koddi, ogkarago kow on porom su dio a ogdatong to Amoy ku no labow pad sikandin koddi
Di nigbabansagon to mgo otow no ogtabak to, “Kono no soin no lukos; si Barabas ka ogpalibuwason nu.” Nò, si Barabas ka ribildi.
Nig-a-alig sikandan su nokog-un-unawa goinawa ran. Nokogsabut ka sikan. Nokog-iniatoy. Nokogso-ob ka alig dan no darua.
songo gatus
hokad
baluy
ni
Di mgo sulod no indakoli ku to goinawa, agad to sikan ka innangon ku kaniu, di og-iman-iman a to ogkoumaan kow rod to sikan no madmaroyow no ogligkat to napangabangan kow to mgo salo now.
Ka mgo ngalap no isdà no dakol, songo og-il-ilon ka mgo bokog; og-awo-on ka mgo bokog.
Og-angus ki to agoloy, mangga, pangi, kapayas woy ko pinya.
Songo allow, ka Allow to mgo Hudiu to Oghimoloy, nakabayo si Hisus mgo hibatoon din dio to sagboka no kamot no nigpamuaan to tirigu. Ko oghihipanow kandan dio to dalan, namupu ka mgo hibatoon din to pila buwa no tagdoy to tirigu.
bagtad
usaroy
No, dio si Hisus to baloy ni Annas no pig-insoinso dan si Hisus bahin to mgo hibatoon din woy ka ig-anad din.
bako-bakò
No to poglibong ni Hisu Kristu kai to soi tano, no ogkool-ologan ka pighimu ta ko maroyow woy ko kono, ogkatagaan on ko nokoy ka inhimu ta to baloy su ogkool-ologan to hapuy. No ka waro pulus, ogkasilaban on, di ka maroyow, kono ogkasilaban.
No kagi ni Hisus to mgo hibatoon din, “Manio naan to ogkahallok kow? Waro kow pad buwa mogsalig koddi?”
Ian su ligkat to kabogbogan to Magboboot, nohimu ad on no suguanon ni Hisus oyow oghondio a to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. No ka sikan, nounawa rod ki Pedro no songo nohimu on no suguanon ni Hisus to oyow oghondio sikandin to mgo Hudiu.
pa
Ongkorid on ka asawa nu su konò ogpakabuì koykow su konò ogtalabau.
ti-ang
salubabat
Maga-an ogkasundug ka goinawa.
Ko og-ay-ayaran ka batasan ta ogmatapid ka kanta no pogko-otow.
Bahin koddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan, to kono a pad oglibong kai to kalibutan, ka batasan to mgo otow, ogkounawa ka mgo batasan dan to mgo otow dongan to allow pad ni Noi.
pilu
kurung
Kagi ni Pedro to, “Buyag, nig-ongkoran noy ka mgo baloy noy no nigdumaruma koy on koykow.”
Di nigtabak si Hisus to sika mgo anak to, “Waro kow makasabut to kalitukan to ogbuyuon now. Og-insa a kaniu ko ogpakaaguanta kow to unawa to igkoirapi ku?” Nigtabak ka darua to, “Hoo, ogpakaaguanta koy.”
Ko-umos ka batò ko ogkatol-oban to habot.
Pogkaponga, no napulasan on ka dakol no Ampuanan to Magboboot no dio to langit. No dio ku kitaa ka sikan no bulawan no Baul no nataguan to Pogsabut to Magboboot. No ian ka taguanan to mgo ingkasulat dongan no mgo sabut to Magboboot dio to mgo otow. Inogo on no nigkikilat on woy duon maagbot no daging woy nigbabalansì woy nigdinug woy nig-uran on to mabogat no magakinomu no uran.
Nò, sikan ian, mgo sulod, ko oglimudlimud kow no ogkoon to sikan no poglabung no igparoromdom to kamatayon ni Hisus, tatagad kow pad to mgo duma now.
Ogkapulusan pad sikandan no ogmasakit so goinawa ran to maroot no hinimuan dan su duon igkarago dan dio to Magboboot kandan.
Di ka mgo taga Hirusalim woy ka mgo igbuyag dan, agad to tibo no Allow to Oghimoloy, ogdinogon dan man do ka ingkasulat dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, di waro dan tokora to si Hisus ka lagboy no ingkatuon no Igbuyag dan. Woy songo waro dan masabuti ka ingkasulat dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot. Di ko pigbobootan dan to ogpohimatayan si Hisus, natuman dan on ka sikan no dongan no ingkasulat.
lad-ang
Ko ogkapongaan to poghimu to darua no allow, bali ogkako-on ka sikan no agkud.
Ungod ogkabalbalikid ka lawa rin su subla ka masakit din
Sikan ian to nigsolod on si Pablo to anaranan to mgo Hudiu no nigpaap–apuloy kandan woy ka kono no Hudiu no nigtahud to Magboboot. Woy allow–allow nighondio si Pablo to limuranan dan no nigpaap–apuloy to mgo otow no ogmanhondio.
bislig
yadyad
Agad pila ka ig-uras nu koddì, koykow ka ogbo-ot ko pila ka igbogoy nu.
Woy nigtabak sikandan to, “Buyag, ogkoiniatan noy porom no ogpakakita koy.”
Ko ogkagi a no du-on otow no ogtampod to kagi ku, ogbugsong. Ko og-ampawan din ka kagi rin, igdo-isok.
Di duon allow no ogdakopon on ka lukos no ogpangasawa no warad sikandin dio to kandan, sikan ian ka allow no oglangkad to ogkoon sikandan.”
asuan to busow
tigom
lusilom
Agad nigpatambal to mohon-ing no mgo doktul, wa moulii. Niggamit din ka tibo no salapi din no ogbayad to mgo doktul di waro nigmaroyow. Noulat nasi sikandin; nigdakol nasi ka garamon din.
no kagi rin kuwo kandin, “Ka tahan no batasan to mgo otow, igpohun-a ran ka maroyow no inumanon. Ko dakol ka pog-inum to mgo magaliug, no konad on ogkananaman ka pog-inum dan, ian igpoinum ka mad-ang on. Di sikoykow, atag, noindanan nud ka maroyow no inumanon no kuntoon on igpoinum to mgo otow ka maroyow.”
Ogsaparan ta to, “Nokoy ka igmanna-asna-asoy now? Hirogò kow on su matanob on no mausilom.”
Mohimulung ka layag to amag.
Ian ka inkasulat to Magboboot dio to Tahan no Kasulatan to pinanganak ni labow no Igbuyag Dabid ka Im-imanan ta woy to dio kun to Bitlihim mootow no ian ka lunsud ni Dabid dongan.”
Koddi, ignangon ku kaniu no impakita to Amoy ku koddi. Di sikaniu, ogpaagad-agad kow to ogsuguon to kaniu no amoy.”
Sikan ka indilin to Magbobo-ot kandan to konò igpako-on.
takow
busow
Sikan ian, sikanak no si Pablo, ungod ku ig-ampu to Magboboot sikaniu. No napirisu a su ligkat to pogtuman ku to igpohimu ni Hisu Kristu kaniu no kono no mgo Hudiu.
Ko ogtalabau ki, ogtibuluson ta ka oghimuon ta.
taliwarò
Ogkilow ki to "salad".
kita
dulug
Dakol man so goinawa ni Hisus to sikan no mgo patatalahari no si Maria woy ka kakoy rin woy si Lasaru.
Nigbuligan to Magboboot ka mgo otow no nig–alap to kinagian din, no mohon–ing ka nigtuu on to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
Ko ligad ki no ogkakois ta ka lamisaan, ogka-antog su nawo-il.
Nò, sikoddi no Labow no Igbuyag, ognangonan ku ka mgo otow no kai to kawanan ku to, ‘Sikaniu ka nohoy-uan to Amoy ku no Magboboot, dini kow, solod kow kai to Pogsugu to Magboboot no impanagana rin, ligkat no nighimu ka kalibutan.
Ogbigtas ka bulan; og-awo-on.
Sagmana now sikandin su songo ogtuu to Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow. Sikan ian ka batasan no oglitos kanta no nasakup to Magboboot. Buligi now si Pibi ko duon og-awoson din su mohon-ing ka ingkabulig din to mgo nigtuu, woy songo nabuligan a rin.
tagima
Malu-ag ka doun din no ogpoko-opus to lawa to sikan no kayu no kapigsula
Si Hisu Kristu dod ka ogpakalabow to tibo su tahan on no duon sikandin no waro pad ka agad nokoy no kalaglagan no nohimu, woy su sikandin ka ogtanudtanud to tibo no nohimu on oyow ogkatapid on.
Ka otow no ogparakoldakol to ngaran din ogdoisokon naan do ka ngaran din to Magboboot. Di ka otow no nigdoisok din ka ngaran din, ogdakolon to Magboboot ka kandin no ngaran.”
panta-as
Ka ogparatongan no allow, ian ka asolom.
sampulù
Du-on otow no nanagu to agoloy to saku no nalubu on no ogtonostonoson dan to andu to ogdasok oyow ogkarasok ka agoloy to saku.
Moirap to otow no ogtalipag to mabolbol no woig.
hakup
it-it
bogyas
dugnal
Sikandin kun ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan no ian kun ka Labow no Igbuyag to Israil. Ko oglogsad on, ogtuu koy on to sikandin ka sika Im-imanan ta.” Woy ka sika darua no pinoglimang ki Hisus duon to mgo krus songo nigsusumpalit ki Hisus.
Sulod, nataga a to maroyow ka goinawa nu to tangkaan to Magboboot. No ogbuyu a kandin oyow ogmaroyow ka pog-ugpo nu woy ka lawa nu.
sungalngal
Nò, kagi ni Hisus to, “Ogkapulusan ka to soini, Simon, anak ni Huan su soini no natagaan nu, waro nigligkat to otow, di nigligkat to Amoy ku no dio to langit.
Og-agbotan nu to ognangon oyow lagboy ogpakarinog ka duma.
Ka woig no konò og-anlas, naponong.
lagotong
Di ka duma no otow nigsapad no nignangon to, “Balagara nu. Tagaran tanow ko oghondii si Elias no ogpangabang kandin.”
tambog
Kapugutan koy
Nò, duon dalu to amoy ni Publiu no malasi og–indos woy ogmoinit ka lawa rin. Sikan ian to nigpanumbaloy si Pablo dio to amoy ni Publiu woy nig–ampuan din. No to pog-ampu din, niggongonan ni Pablo ka lawa rin no noulian on ka piggoram din.
tobà
Ka otow no oghimu to baloy, ungod ogpalpal to martiliu to lansang.
Nigtabak ka sika nabawian, “Buyag, nangoni a ko hontow sikandin oyow ogtuu a kandin?”
Nigtabak si Pedro to, “Agad darua ki ka oghimatayan dan, kona a ian ogligal no ogtokoron ku sikoykow.” Songo sikan dod ian ka hogot no innangon to duma no mgo hibatoon din.
Ka otow no ogkawolokwolok, konò ogmatul-id ko ogkagi.  Ko ogpakakagi, ogpakalibonglibong.
Songo allow, mohon-ing ka mgo otow no nigluyudluyud ki Hisus no nigbalikid si Hisus oyow ogtangko to mgo otow no nigkagian din sikandan to,
Pak sugnal kanta to ogko-on ki.
Nignangon man do si Hisus to dangob no pananglitan no kagi rin to, “Ka Pogsugu to Magboboot, ogkounawa to kinalintokan no boni. Igpamula soini to otow dio to kamot din woy ko ogtubu ka sikan no boni woy ko nigdakol on, ogkohimu no matmatikang to tibo no mgo pinamula to sikan no tuid no ogkasalagan to mgo manukmanuk dio to mgo sugpang din,” kagi ni Hisus.
Nigtabak si Maria to diwata to, “Manio man to ogkaboros a to waro a man magongoni to lukos?”
Ogsimboon ta ka Magbobo-ot.
Ko magaan on ogmarusilom, mohon-ing ka mgo otow no nanhondio ki Hisus. Nanduma ran ka mohon-ing no mgo otow no pigbusawan no pigdogil ni Hisus ka mgo busow pinabayo to kagi rin do. Songo pigbawian din ka mgo otow no nandaralu.
Dongan, ko duon daruwa woy ko tatolu no ogpakamalogot to duon otow no niglop-ang on to Balaod ni Moisis, oghimatayan do duon to waro igkohoy-u.
Dokad di to nokouma ka barku to natikobaanan no tano no dio to diralom to woig no nigganlad on ka dulung to barku no warad mawoil ian duon. Sikan ian to nagulak on ka lobut to barku su dakol ka luwak.
baliung
Sikan ian to lagboy ta ogkasabutan to naliwanan on to Magboboot ka mgo talagpanubad no pinanganak ni Libi su si Hisus on ka ingkapayag din no dangob no talagpanubad no ogkoiling ki Milkisidik.
Ka otow no alukuy rin nigsalin to tatolu no gatus no pisus. Ka salapi no nakaratong, darua no gatus dò.
Ka bakotin no ogsusu, ungud ogbunagon ka susu to inoy su oyow oggatasan.
Ko og-uran, og-abat ki to doun no ogtorongon.
boian
Ogpakapanalikud a kaniu no ogpakadalong a to dakol no goinawa to Magboboot kaniu. Ian su inat to ogpakasuwoy kow on to sikan no matul-id no dalan no oghondio ki Hisus su ian now ogkounawaan ka dalaga no waro pad mabuingi no nigpanakinan kud on. No si Hisus ka ogpurut kaniu.
Niglibong si Hisus dio to Probinsia to Galilia no duon to kandin ka kabogbogan no nigligkat dio to Gimukud to Magboboot. Ka nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus, nakalogob on dio to tibo no mgo lunsud no marani to sikan no ugpaan.
No ka lukos, songo kono din og-ongkoran ka kandin no asawa. Di ko duon boi no og-ongkod to asawa rin, og-awoson to kono oghutuk sikandin no ogkaasawa woy litos ko ogpoul-ulioy to goinawa rin to tahan no asawa rin.
gopang
bantok
opuk
To nigdinog ka mgo hibatoon din, nigdoromdom dan ka inkasulat to Tahan no Kasulatan no impasulat to Magboboot bahin ki Hisus. Kagi “Kai ro ian moubus ka goinawa ku, Magboboot, to soini no baloy nu no nalogdog kai to goinawa ku no unawa to hapuy.”
Du-on otow no ogpantompug to og-atopon din no langilan.
Pogkaponga to soini, nig-alam ni Hisus to kapituan woy darua no mgo sakup din, no man darua ka ogsuguon din no ogpohun-oon din dio to agad hondoi no lunsud mgo hilit no songo ogkabayaan din to oghondio.
Ian su ligkat to soini no mgo igkabaybayari ta no magaan do ogkaawo, uromo ogbogayan kid to dakol lagboy no karoyawon no madmaroyow to agad nokoy no nakitaan ta no kono ogkaawo to waro katamanan dio to langit.
opus
Ko du-on darua no ogpalawod no ka sagboka oghun-a, oggapunon on ka nokohun-a no ogko-umaan din on.
kilat
Koddi ka maroyow no talagbantoy to mgo karniru ku no ogpanagana ad on to ogpakimatoy to koddi no karniru.
Pigbogayan a nud, Amo, to koykow no kabogbogan oyow ogkabogayan ku to ogkootawan no waro katamanan ka tibo no mgo otow no imbogoy nud koddi.
gimukud
bingbing
tulò
batu
Oghimuon ku poron ka maroyow, di ian ku nasi oghimuon ka maroot no kono ku igkoiniati.
aslag
daurùn
Ka tibo no mgo baloy, duon mgo otow no nighimu, di ka Magboboot, ian ka talaghimu to tibo.
no ligkat ian ki Abil taman to pogkamatoy ki Sakarias. Dio dan himatayi si Sakarias to taliwaro to tubaranan woy ka sinabong no tagbuanan to Magboboot. Malogot ian,” kagi ni Hisus, “kaniu no nakarongan koddi, ogkalogparan kow to sikan no mgo salo to mgo kaap-apuan now.”
Ko diò a to pantad, nasalanganan ad to pogkalamag to ma-agbot no alimpulus.
No to pog-uli dan, nanangonan dan ka mgo nigtuu kai to sikan no dakol no ingkohoy-u nu kandan. Maroyow ko ogbuligan nu rod sikandan to mgo og-awoson dan dio to dalan su litos ian ko ogbuligan ta ka mgo otow no ogtuman to sugu to Magboboot.
Kon-u nohimu ka sikan? To waro pad nigpatuli si Abraham, nighingaranan on to Magboboot sikandin to maroyow dio to tangkaan din.
ugsob
Di kono ka ogpamminog to sikan no igbatbat no mgo ubat-ubat no waro niglitos to Magboboot woy waro pulus. Di anara nu ka goinawa nu oyow ogpakatuman ka to ogkoiniatan din.
Ian ka kagi to mgo taga Asia su duon pigkita ran no taga Episu no kono no Hudiu no si Tropimu no nigduma ki Pablo duon to lunsud to Hirusalim. No nahan dan no nigdumaan ni Pablo sikandin dio to solod to Dakol no Ampuanan dan. Dokad di, kono.
layap
inatad
sasang
takarau
Og-ang-angga-an ta [ka anak ta]
No sikaniu no nakaasawa on, og-awoson to lukos to ogtuman to katondanan din to asawa rin. No ka boi, songo og-awoson to ogtuman to kandin no katondanan to asawa rin.
dilin
Ogdanntoy on ka allow ko ogliu on to bubungan ka ogsalop on.
hilit
simag
Pogligkat dan on, mabatbataroy ran no kagi ran, “Hontow buwa ka ogpaliiron ta to batu no duon to bo-bo to pilang?” Dakol ka sika batu. Nò, ko nigtonggak dan nigkita ran to noonsig ka batu no inlokob to bo-bo to pilang no warad naatangi.
To nigkagikagi pad si Hisus, duon otow no nokouma puun to baloy ni Hairu. Sikandin ka sika no igbuyag to anaranan to mgo og-ampu. Kagi to sika lukos ki Hairu to, “Kono nud on ogsasawa ka Maistru su namatoy on ka anak nu.”
Nò, malasi nighondio sikandan to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu su ogsayoon dan ka Magboboot.
bulanbulan
Insugu ni Hisus ka mgo suguonon to, “Hiponaa now ka mgo kuron to woig.” Nò, pinasimil dan ka woig.
hulop
tusak
bunow
Nig-ukù on ka batò.
Kasubung ka woig
Nò, kuntoon, hogot ian to ogkoongkoran ka Dakol no Ampuanan now.
balatung
Hutuk man do no dumaa ni Satanas si Hisus dio to matikang lagboy no bubungan oyow igpapitow rin ka tibo no mgo ugpaan kai to kalibutan woy ka igkaratu dan woy ka karoyawi to tag saboka kandan.
alu-an
Di duon man do ka otow no kono no Hudiu su taga Samaria no songo nakabayo to sikan no otow no napalian. To pogpitow rin ka napalian, nohoy-uan din sikandin.
anggam
butatang
himoloy
Sikan ian to oglogparan ku sikandin woy ka mgo duma rin no ogmanhimu to mgo maroot. No ogbogayan ku sikandan to dalu no konad on ogpakaonow-onow dio to hibatanan dan. No ogkabaybayaran lagboy sikandan to dalu no igbogoy ku kandan. Magaan ku ogtumanon ka soini no imbohog ku ko kono dan ogbalbalawan ka goinawa ran no og-ongkoran ka mgo maroot no oghimuon dan.
nanam
Waro malugoy no nighondio si Hisus to songo lunsud no nighingaranan dan to Nain. Ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus, lagkos to mohon-ing no mgo otow ka nigduma.
Ogsulingon ki to’gkagi ki.
gipud
Ogpohirapan dan ka mgo otow to ogtuman to subla no mgo sugu no ian ogkounawaan ka mabogat no kalaglagan no kono dan ogpakaaguanta to ogtiang. Di kono sikandan ogbulig to agad hontow oyow ogtuman to sugu dan.
kobut
No si Maria, tatolu on no bulan ka pog-ugpo din dio to baloy ni Elisabit no nig-uli on.
Ko ogpoko-utol koy to dakol no ngalap, ogsugnuan noy ka duma to hapuy oyow ogkosog no konò.
kagot
Nò, tag sagboka kaniu ko duon talinga now, og-awoson now to ogpamminog kow to soini no ignangon to Gimukud to Magboboot no ogkagi to, ‘Ka otow no kono ogparoog ki Satanas, ogbogayan ku sikandan to ogkoon to sikan no oghingaranan to mana no insasabuk dio to langit. Woy ogbogayan ku sikandan to maputi no batu no ogsulatan to iam no ngaran dan. Di waro loin no otow no ogkataga ko nokoy ka igkasulat to sikan no batu su ka otow no ogkabogayan to sikan no batu, ian doka ogkataga ko hontow no ngaran ka igkasulat.’ ”
Dokad di soini no kagi ku kaniu, malogot ian woy maroyow ian kaniu ko oghondio a to Amoy ku su ko kona a moghondio, kono ogpokouma dii ka Gimukud to Magboboot no kandin ka Talagbulig kaniu. Di ko oghondio a, ogpohondinion ku sikandin.
kosog
langag
Nò, nataga si Hisus to duon bantaan dan to ogpogoson dan poron to sikandin on ka Labow no Igbuyag dan. Nò, niglonus ian no nigtakorog si Hisus no sagboka rin do dio to bubungan no malopot.
Kandin no nigsugu koddi, kona a rin og-ongkoran su ian ku oghimuon ka maroyow no igkarago din,” kagi ni Hisus.
domol
Duon otow no nigbasa to ingkasulat to Balaod ni Moisis woy ka ingkasulat dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot. Pogkaponga, kagi to mgo igbuyag to anaranan ki Pablo woy ki Birnabi to, “Mgo sulod, ko duon ignangonnangon now no ig–oson–oson now to mgo otow, ogpamminog koy poron.”
Ka ngadngad, sikan ka igdakosol ka mgo mo-irob diò to kamanga.
Ogkalipuan ki to uban.
No ogkapulusan lagboy ka sika mgo suguonon ko ogpokouma on ka kandan no igbuyag, agad liwaro to karusiloman woy ko marani ogkapawo, no ogkitoon din ka mgo suguonon din to waro ian mohirogo su nigpanagana. Ognangonan ku sikaniu,” kagi ni Hisus, “ka sikan no igbuyag dan, oghalinon din ka kinabo din no ogpapinnuuon din ka sikan no mgo suguonon din no kandin on ka ogpanhonat to koonon dan. Ogkarago ian ka sikan no mgo suguonon din no nakapanagana to igbuyag dan.”
alambri
No, dio dod sikandan to pagkoonan, no nigpaap-apuloy on ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus bahin ko hontow dapit kandan ka labow.
Soini igkararua no songo ogkounawa rod to nokohun-a. Pounawaa now ka goinawa now to mgo duma now to goinawa now to kaniu no lawa.”
indanan
Ogpanagana ki to oyow ogpakanangonnangon ki to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod to maawang no goinawa ta no ogligkat to Magboboot. Sikan ian ka ogkounawa to sapatus ta.
bagkugung
batu
Songo kuwo buwa ko duon otow no ogkagi to, “Woy ogtokoron ka igkaroyow no batasan to Magboboot ko duon maroot no oghimuon ta. Sikan ian, ko duon oghimuon ta no maroot, kono buwa no litos ko oglogparan ki rin.” Nò, ko sikan ka kagi ran, kono ogkaayun ka doromdom dan su ka doromdom dan, dio do duon ogligkat to mgo otow
lom-ag
Nataga kow to waro a mogsasowsasow kaniu to pog-ugpo ku no dio a pad to kaniu. Di kuntoon, duon ogpansob kanak to nahan dan to nigpan-ubatan ku woy ko niggawayan ku sikaniu.
Sikandin ka nigpangabang kanami to sikan no mohirap no igkamatoy noy poron. No ogpokoiman-iman koy rod to ogkohutukhutuk koy rin no ogkapangabangan to ogkoumaan noy no igkabaybayari.
ungyag
Nò, nighutuk nigsolod si Pilatu dio ki Hisus. Nò, nig-insaan din si Hisus to, “hondoi ka malogot no pigligkatan nu?” Di waro mogtabak si Hisus.
Ka takubung, ngaran to ambow no daddakol no lukosan.A takubung is the name of a very large male rodent.Ka mgo lugì to tabunan to takubung, ogpoglawanglawangon diò to diralom to oghimuan dan to salag.
Nò, nigsokol so goinawa to mgo hibatoon din no masunsunduloy ran nig-inso to, “Kono buwa no sikoddi?”
ulandoy
Ka soini no sulat, nigligkat kanak no songo pogbuyagon to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu. No igpaalap ku koykow, Gayo no indakoli ku to goinawa ligkat to pogtuu ta to tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon.
Sabolan a dò woy ni Andì to nakabayò a to kamulaan.
hilam
Di dio do to mariu ogbabantoy su ogkahallok sikandan to ogpakalagkos to kandin no iglogpad. Woy ogpakakagi sikandan to, ‘Kalogon, kohoy-u ro ian lagboy su ka mabantug no lunsud to Babilunia, naraat lagboy su nigdagsangan on to logpad no waro do malingonngon no noubus on.
dangag
sumbung
Ka homoy, tahan on ogbokal diò to diralom.
Panambad to kayu.
Di mgo sulod no igdakoli ku to goinawa, doromdoma now ka innangon nokani to mgo suguanon to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu.
Ka otow no na-agawan to kalaglagan woy salapì, igtunlun din ka otow no nigpan-agow kandan to, mamatoy ka poron ka otow no maro-ot to batasan.
Dongan, niggutasan ad di wara a now pakoona. Namaraan ad di wara a now poinuma.
Mgo sulod, soini ka ig-udling ku kaniu. Ogpaboot ki to Gimukud to Magboboot no kono kid on ogpaalap to sikan no mgo maroot no igkoibog to lawa ta.
Ogbuyu koy to Magboboot oyow ogkohoy-uan kow woy oyow ogbogayan kow to maawang no goinawa no ogligkat to Magboboot no ian amoy ta woy ligkat dod to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu.
Nataga a to og-aguantoon now ka mgo igkabaybayari now no ogligkat to pogtuu now to kanak no ngaran woy waro kow napogul to pogtuu now.
pakow
makogal so goinawa
boka
Magi-insò ka igbogoy ku no babuy kaniu, ig-antog ku to doromdom nu ko kalingawan nu ka kanak?
Di tongod to mgo Hudiu, og-inso a ko waro dan pad makarinog tongod to Im-imanan dan poron no Igbuyag? Nalugoy ro man nakarinog sikandan su duon ingkasulat dongan to talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, no kagi rin to: “Ka soini no nangnangonon, naalap-alap on dio to agad hondoi no otow kai to tano woy nigtangkap on dio to mgo katamanan to soini no kalibutan.”
sabud
Ka lawa to barku, ka dulung, sikan ka oghun-a.
daydayanan
pabba
Si Huda asawa rin si Tamar. Ka mgo anak dan ian si Piris woy si Sira. Si Piris ka amoy ni Hisron. Si Hisron, amoy ni Aram.
batuk
bitu-on
Ian su ko duon agad darua woy ko tatolu no ogkalimud oyow og-ampu to ngaran ku, duon a to taliwaro dan.”
tutung
sabi
Ko manalinga on ka allow, nigbabansagon ni Hisus to, “Iloi, Iloi, lama sabaktani,” no soini ka kalitukan. “Magboboot ku, Magboboot ku, manio to nig-ongkoran a nud?”
Kono kow ogkahallok to mgo otow no oghimatoy ro to lawa now ro di kono ogpokohimatoy to gimukud now. Ian now porom ogkahallokan ka Magboboot su ogpokohimu no ogpakatugdo ka lawa now woy ka gimukud now dio to imperno
haw-on
linsobuk
Nò, “Koddi ka Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan kai to kalibutan no igpakita ku kaniu to duon ian katondanan ku to ogpasaylu to salo to mgo otow.” Nò, nigkagian din ka sika nigkolog to, “Usi, onow kad on, paragas kad on ogsasindog no puruta nu ka hibatanan nu no uli kad on.”
Sikan ian, og-awoson to ogpaagad-agad kinow to soini no kagi no impasulat dongan to Magboboot to, “Ka sikan no otow no ogkoinat no ogsayo, og-awoson to ian din do ogsayoon ka pighimu to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.”
Mgo anak, nokouma kid on to tipouri. Nigdinog kow to duon otow uromo kai to kalibutan no og-usig ki Kristu. Di agad kuntoon pad, mohon-ing ka natagaan tad no mgo otow no og-usig ki Kristu. Sikan ian to nataga ki to nokouma kid on to tipouri.
Utù, alowa nu pà ka manuk no ogkoko-on to dinampil no homoy.
siù
Sikan ian, ka otow no ogdumaruma ki Hisus, kono din ogparagason ka mgo salo din. Di ka otow no ogparagason din ka poghimu to mgo salo, waro nigtokod ki Hisus, woy songo waro din itagu to goinawa rin.
bubun
Nasayapak si Binita.
Pogkaponga, duon nigkita ku no gumawan dio to langit no napulasan. Woy nakarinog a to maagbot no kagi no noiling to bungag no sikan dod ka lagong no nigdinog ku to an-anayan. No nigkagi to, “Lopow ka kai su igpapitow ku koykow ka ogpokouma uromo.”
Nò, nigpallaguy sikandan dio to tibo no marani no mgo lunsud. Nò, nigloung dan to igduyunan dan ka mgo nigdaralu dio ki Hisus. Agad hondoi si Hisus, inhatod dan ka mgo nigdaralu dio to kandin.
no insabuk dan dio to tangkaan dan su igbogoy ran on. No ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus ka nanalad dio to agad hontow no duon og–awoson dan.
Ka sikan no ig-anad dan, ian ogkounawaan ka kogang duon to sapu no og-at-at on. No ka anad ni Himiniu woy si Pilitu, songo ogkoiling dod.
Mgo sulod, natagaan ku to waro ku pad natuman ka tibo no ogkoiniatan ni Hisu Kristu kanak. Di ka oghimuon ku atag, oglingawan kud on ka tahan no nohimu ku, no ungod a ogpoomot to poghimu ku to mgo ogkoiniatan to Magboboot oyow ogpokoutol a to tibo no ogkoiniatan din no ogbogoy kanak uromo.
Ong-ongora [nu] to iglom-ag noy pad bag.
bayokò
otil
Inat to ogka-andalan ka doromdom ta.
Di ko hondoi longod ka agad nokoy no lawa to nammatoy, songo dio ogkalimud ka mgo daddakol no mgo manukmanuk no ogkoon to sapu to nammatoy.”
Ko kò pad ogbokal ka bulak ogti-om pad.
tu-on
Si Moisis dod ka nignangon to mgo pinanganak ni Israil to, ‘Duon uromo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no igpohondio din no ogkounawa kanak no igbogoy rin dio to kaniu.’
mukat
alamara
saluroy
Di ko masakit lagboy so goinawa ni Hisus, nigpoomot sikandin to nig-ampu pad man do to hogot no pog-ampu din no niglimusongan on kandin. Ka pogpitow ta to limusong din, ogko-unawa to langosa su dakol ka tulu no ogdaragakdak on dio to tano.
Ko du-on otow ko ogkabolù to duma rin, maga-an oggongon to ulu to duma rin no igngadngad din to so-og.
Woy duon narinog ku no lagong ligkat to langit no nigkagi to, “Isulat nu ka soini. Ligkat kuntoon, ogkapulusan ka mgo otow no ogkoumaan to igkamatoy ran su ligkat to pogtuu ran to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. No nigtabak ka Gimukud to Magboboot no nigkagi to, “Malogot ian to ogkarago sikandan su ogpokohimoloy on sikandan su warad on ka igkabaybayari ran no nig-aguanta ran tongod to pogtuu ran. Woy ogsayoon sikandan su tongod to mgo maroyow no hinimuan dan.”
Og-anaron ka mgo batò oyow du-on ogkato-uanan dan.
Kagi ran to, “Ka goinawa noy ian to ogkapulusan ka soini no Labow no Igbuyag no nighondini to ngaran to Magboboot. Ogbogayan ki to maawang no goinawa ta no ogpuun dio to Langit woy ogsayoon tanow ka dakol no ngaran to Magboboot.”
gunow
“Omunaan agad hontow no ogpakarinog to soini no mgo innangon ku woy ogtuman to soini, ogkounawa sikandin to otow no duon katagaanan din, no ko nighimu rin ka baloy, nig-ay-ayaran din nigpos-ok no in-untud din dio to batu.
limun
dop-ug
bodday
lagtang
Sikaniu no mgo bato, ungod kow ogpaagad-agad to amoy woy inoy now, su sikan ka ogkoiniatan to Magboboot.
gusugusu
hul-us
Sikan ian no ungod ogmanokal ka goinawa noy. Di nataga ki, tagood to duon ki pad to soini no lawa ta, waro ki pad makatood no oghondio to sikan no ugpaan to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
aboy
No to igkarangob no allow, nokouma sikandan dio to lunsud to Sisaria. Si Kornilio, nigtatagad to pogdatong dan no impanoy rin on limura ka mgo sulod din woy ka lagboy no mgo karumaan din.
hodhod
Kono ogligkat to Magboboot ka sikan no tigbal do no katouanan, woy waro nigligkat to Gimukud din. Di ka sikan, ogligkat atag to pogdoromdom to mgo otow no kai ro to soini no kalibutan woy songo ogligkat dod ki Satanas no ian igbuyag to mgo busow. unawa ian to doromdom ni Satanas no igbuyag to mgo busow.
losob
ko-on
bagungan
Ko ogba-adba-aron to tatolu ka songo saku no homoy, ogtatoluan ka ba-ad.
Nò, ka pogkouyag to mgo nammatoy, ogkoiling dod to sikan no boni no igpamula ta. Ka lawa ta no ingkalobong to tano, ogkamolu on. Di ko ogkouyag on, ogloin on su konad on ogkamolu.
Nò, nighipanow si Pedro woy ka sikan no duma rin no hibatoon no oghondio to sikan no sabalanan.
Agad nokoy ka ig-amut ta no mgo dorounan, songo igbolug dod.
ulib
bailan
kodkod
Ka soini no sulat, nigligkat kanak no si Pablo woy ki Sustinis no sulod ta to pogtuu. No sikanak, nohimu a no suguanon ni Hisu Kristu su ian ka imboot to Magboboot.
hidhid
Duon sagboka no boi no nig–amut no ogpamminog to kagi ni Pablo. Ka ngaran din no si Lidia no taga Tiatira. Tahan no batasan din to og–ampu to Magboboot. No ian hulingon din ka ogduwad to mahal no manggad no malugowlugow. Pogdinog ni Lidia to innangonnangon ni Pablo, nakasabut woy nigtuu on su si Hisus no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, nigbulig to goinawa rin oyow ogpakasabut on.
logoy
Ko moon-ing ka mgo otow, ogpakapanli-otli-ot ki ka ogbayò.
Ian su nokouma on ka allow no ogbunsud to Magboboot to ogpitawon ko litos ka batasan to mgo otow. Di oghunnoon din to ogpitawon ka mgo batasan to kandin no mgo sakup. No ko sikanta no nigtuu ka oghunnoon din ogpitawon, momohirap pad ka igkabaybayari to mgo otow no kono ogtuu to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus.
Ian su ogkoongkoran nud on ka tibo, unawa to tahan no manggad no songo ogkoongkoran no ogkaliwanan on to iam. Di sikoykow atag, kono ka ogkahalin no waro katamanan nu.”
Nigtabak si Huan kandan, “Ko darua ka kinabo now, ibogoy nu ka sagboka to waro kinabo, woy ko duon koonon now, talari now ka waro ogkoonon,” kagi ni Huan.
Nig-agpot si Mery su nig-amut on to songo kausiloman dò.
ag-agan
Inkatokow ran no nigkita ran ka darua no otow no ogpaal-alukuy sikandan ki Hisus. Sikandan, si Moisis woy si Elias.
Katanud ka to ogbogoy to bogas to songo baloy ta.
kulut
Nò, ogkoiniatan tad on ian to oyow ogkohimu kinow on no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot su ligkat to ogkasagboka kinow on ki Kristu. No su nigtuu kid on to sikan, nakatokod kid on to makasasalo kinow nanaan no ogkounawa ki rod to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. Nò, su malogot ka sikan, og-inso a ko ian ta ignangon to ogkohimu kinow on no makasasalo su ligkat ki Kristu? Kono man ogkaayun no kagi. Ka ku kow!
Kuntoon, ogtukow ad lagboy to Lagboy no Igbuyag tanow su bali kow man do makabulig kanak no sikan ian ka impapitow now to duon dod ka pogkohoy-u now kanak. Di natagaan kud to duon dod ian ka pogkohoy-u now kanak, di nokani waro igkohimu now to ogbulig kanak.
Ka so-ini no simana to katamanan to Mayo, og-olog-olog a porom to og-ulì diò to Maambago, di nig-ugsul on ka mgo pilitianan to mgo sakayan.
Nigtabak si Hisus to, “Agad hontow no otow ka og-inum to woig to soin no balun, ogkoibog oghutuk no og-inum.
Du-on anak noy no do-isok pad, mgo songo tu-id pad ka pogko-otow rin.
Nakabobosì ka batò no nigpinpinnu-u.
abusu
butut
Ian noy ogkoiniatan, to oyow, taman to poglibong ni Hisus, ungod now ro og-im-imani ka pogtuman to Magboboot to tibo no innangon din.
Di hipanow kow on. Nangoni now on si Pedro mgo duma no hibatoon din. Soini ka ignangon now kandan, ‘Oghun-a si Hisus kaniu dio to Galilia. Dio now kitaa sikandin no unawa to innangon din kaniu.’ ”
Sikan ian no ka giboon to namatoy, nig-asawa rin on ka boi no nabalu. Songo namatoy naan do sikandin.
unawa
Kagi to dangob no otow ki Hisus to, “Buyag, ogduma a poron koykow di paag-agari a nu pa oyow ogpanuguntugun a pad to mgo otow dio to baloy ku.”
Kagi ni Huan, “Ka bayad to buhis no innangon to igbuyag now, kono now pasubloi.”
Kagi ran ki Hisus, “Nangoni koy ko sikoykow ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan.” Kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Ko ognangonan ku sikaniu, kono kow ogtuu to kagi ku,
halomhom
Woy kagi rin pad to, “Kono kud on ogdoromdomon ka mgo salo dan woy ka mgo maroot no nighimu ran.”
Di kagi rin to, “Doka oghimua ka sikan su og-un-unawa ki ro no suguanon to Magboboot. Woy un-unawa ki ro to mgo sulod nu no mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, woy to tibo no mgo otow ogpaagad-agad to mgo kinagian to soini no diblu. Ian nu ro ogsimboon ka Magboboot.”
Ka duma ni Tikiku, si Onisimu. Ogkasaligan sikandin no sulod ta rod to pogtuu ki Hisus woy duma now rod no taga Kulusas. Ognangonan kow ran to tibo no ingkabayo noy kai.
No ian to dakol ka masakit to goinawa ran su intagataga ni Pablo kandan to ogpokohipanow on sikandin no konad on ogpokogkitakita sikandan. Pogkaponga, nan–alagad pad ki Pablo dio to barku.
lobì
woy ka mgo samuksamuk. Sikan ka oghimuon to mgo otow no maroot so pogdoromdom dan woy naawo on to kandan no doromdom ka tu-tuu ian no tinuuan. Naan dan no ko ogpasakup sikandan to Magboboot, duon on dalan dan to ogpanalapi.
Maniò ka?
tokap
Nò, ko nokouma ka mgo taga Samaria dio to longod din, nighinggat dan sikandin to og-ugpo pad dio to kandan. Nò, nig-ugpo woy si Hisus to darua no allow.
silib
subla
Nò, bahin to ogkouyag ka namatoy, duon kagi ku kaniu. Nigbasa kow on naan toimpasulat ni Moisis bahin tosikan malopot no kayu no nalogdog do duon di waro natutung. Nalugoy on namatoy si Abraham woy si Isaak woy si Hakub ko nignangon ka Magboboot ki Moisis to, ‘Koddi ka Magboboot ni Abraham woysi Isaak woy si Hakub.’
Pogkaponga, duon tuud ni Pablo no nigligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot to oghipanow no dio ogbayo to mgo probinsia to Masidonia woy ka Girisia no oghondio to Hirusalim. Kagi ni Pablo to, “Pogkaponga ku to ogpanumbaloy dio to Hirusalim, og–awoson ku to oghondio a to lunsud to Ruma.”
dunghul
No ian to ogpaagad-agad ki su ogkoiniatan to Magboboot to oyow ligkat to mgo maroyow no hinimuan ta, ogpakahagtong on no oghubabo ka mgo otow no waro mataga to kinagian to Magboboot.
Ka sikan, waro a pad tokora to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Kristu no dio to ugpaan to Hudia.
Ogsayoon ku sikaniu no mgo nigtuu no dio to Kurintu su og-ungoron a now ogdoromdomon woy su ogtuman kow to sikan no innangonnangon ku kaniu.
pilas
hakus
tuloy
sapù
Ka mgo otow no ogmangali to mundu, og-ug-ug to mundù diò to woig su oglu-an dan pad
Tibo ka mgo sugu to mgo Balaod woy ka mgo in-anad to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan, ogligkat do to soini no darua no mgo sugu.
Sika otow no ogtalabau dio to kamot din, og-awoson no konad og-uli oyow og-angoy to kinabo din. Ogsalsalia ro sikandan.
Konò kow oglasilasi ka ogsausaukilom diò to songo baloy no du-on mgo dalaga.
Soini pad. Ka mgo amoy tanow kai to soi kalibutan, nig-ogotan ki ran no nigtahud ta rod sikandan. Di hontow man ka lagboy no ogtahuron ta ko kono no ka Magboboot no ian Amoy ta no dio to langit su oyow ogkatimulan on ka igkaroyawi to pogkouyag ta no ogligkat kandin?
Ian ogpolisan -- nigdologan --  ka kandin no asawa no nabunut.
Dokad di to kono ogkohimu su duon impanangon to Magboboot dongan to sikan no Tahan no Kasulatan to, ka tibo no mgo otow kai to kalibutan, nabobootan to bogbog to salo. Ian su nig-awos to oyow woy ki ro ogbogayan to sikan no igkohoy-u no insabut to Magboboot ko ogtuu kinow on ki Hisu Kristu.
Ian su waro otow, agad hontow no og-umalagon to Magboboot.
Kuntoon, kua nu ka bayad now woy uli kow on su sikan ian ka goinawa ku no igbogoy ku to mgo namoori no songo unawa to imbogoy kud kaniu.
Impasulat to Magboboot ka tahan no Balaod dio to mgo Hudiu pinabayo ki Moisis. Di kuntoon ka kamalogotan, nigdatong on pinabayo ki Hisu Kristu tagkos to dakol no igkohoy-u rin kanta.
Kagi ran, “Nakarinog koy no pig-iling si Hisus, ‘Oggulakon ku ka soin no Dakol no Ampuanan no nighimu to mgo otow no ko ogligad ka tatolu no allow oghimuon ku to dangob no kono no mgo otow ka oghimu.’ ”
Ian su uromo ogpokouma ka mgo kono no malogot no Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan woy ka mgo kono no malogot no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot. Oghimuon dan ka mgo koin-inuan mgo igpatokod dan oyow ogkagawayan dan porom ka mgo otow no nig-alam to Magboboot, ko ogkoimu.
Konò og-utong so mo-irob ku
kobbiung
No ka ogkoumaan ta to sikan no ingkohoy-u ro duon to Magboboot, songo kono ogkounawa to sikan no ogkoumaan to sikan no salo to sikan no sagboka no otow no si Adan. Ian su, ligkat to sikan no sagboka no salo, nigbobootan to Magboboot ka mgo otow oyow ogkamatoy sikandan. Di ligkat to sikan no ingkohoy-u rin do duon kanta, agad mohon-ing on ka mgo salo ta, ogkapasaylu kinow rin no ogkohimu kinow on no maroyow dio to tangkaan din.
lirù
Mohon–ing ka nohimu to mgo suguanon ni Hisus no mgo kabolongbolonganan woy ka igmalogot to sikan no nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus. No ka tibo no mgo otow, nigtahud to Magboboot.
Mangguliguli ka mgo ias to babuy no namatoy.
‘Sikaniu no ogsusumpalit, pamminog kow su duon oghimuon ku to kaniu no pog-ugpo no lagboy no igkabolongbolong now. Di agad ko duon og-ay-ayaran no ognangonnangon kaniu to sikan, di kono kow ogtuu no ogkammatoy kow ro duon.’ ”Sikan do ka innangon ni Pedro to mgo otow.
koykow
sabuk
apù to talinga
Ka otow no maga-an ogkapolaan to talabau rin, mananoy ogkaponga ka baloy rin to oghimu.
Dio to libuwasan to gumawan din duon otow no lagboy ian bag no publi no ka ngaran din si Lasaru. Kandin, layun oghibathibat su natibo soi lawa rin, nigkogang.
ulamitan
iling
ukù
To nokouma on ka igkawalu no allow to pogkootow ni Hisus, nigpatuli dan on sikandin su sikan ka batasan to mgo Hudiu no si Hisus ka igpohingaran dan. To waro pad maboros si Maria, tahan on innangon to diwata no suguanon to Magboboot to, “Ko og-anak ka, ian nu ihingaran si Hisus.”
Nakarinog ka sikan nabutud to si Hisus no taga Nasarit ka ogligad. Pogdinog din nigbabansagon to, “Wow Hisus, pinanganak ni Dabid! Kohoy-ui a nu.”
Ko du-on igkasasow nu, ogko-ulingol ka ko du-on og-insò koykow.
Niggongonan ni Hisus ka bolad to soini no boi, no naparagas naawo ka moinit to lawa rin. Nò, nig-onow nigparagas nigsasindog woy nigpanhonat sikandin to koonon woy ki Hisus.
Nig-onow on si Husi no pigduma rin on ka bato woy ka inoy, no nig-uli on sikandan dio to ugpaan to Israil.
“Nò,” kagi to mgo otow no nan–ampu to, “Tu–tuu ian, Magboboot, su nokani kai to soini no lunsud to Hirusalim, nalimud ka mgo igbuyag no si Hirodis, si Punsiu Pilatu, woy ka mgo Hudiu woy ka kono no Hudiu. No ian to nalimud sikandan su og–ogotan dan ka waro salo no suguanon nu no si Hisus no ian pig–alam nu no Im–imanan to mgo Koot–otawan.
No ko kono ka og-aguanta no ogtagad su oggutasan kad, dio ka pad ogkoon to baloy nu oyow kono ka ogkalogparan to Magboboot. Duon dod inso now kanak. Di woy a ro ogtabak kaniu ogpakatood a no ogpanumbaloy.
Niggupal on woy nigtaladtalad dan on woy impa-abin dan ka ulu to nigbaba to sikan no babuy.
Kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandan, “Nokouma on ka allow no sikoddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan, dakol ka pogsayo to Magboboot koddi pinabayo to kamatayon ku.
Ian ingkalimotow to inoy to batò no namatoy ko nigkita rin ka “ID” to anak din.
Ko nokoy no tambal no ogpakabatuk to masakit, ian ka ma-agbot no tambal.
tagbanwa
Kagi rin to, “Bantoy kow to sika mgo talag-anad to Balaod. Maroyow ran to og-ilis to malayat no kinabo, woy maroyow ran ka igtahud to mgo otow dio to palingki ko ogkumustoon sikandan. Lagkos, og-alamon dan ka mgo pinnuuanan to mgo mabantug no mgo otow dio to anaranan to mgo og-ampu. Ko duon pagkoonan, songo dio dod ogpinnuu sikandan to longod to mgo datu.
Og-agbotan nu to ognangon oyow lagboy ogpakarinog ka duma.
No kuntoon, Pilimun, ogpoulion ku si Unisimu dio to koykow. Di ko oghipanow on sikandin, ogkoiling to ogpakaruma ka goinawa ku kandin.
Di mgo sulod, ka sikan no mgo otow no natokod no pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu, niglitos on to goinawa ran ka in-anad ku to mgo otow no warad timuli. Di ian ku innangon to natokod on sikandan no igbuyag su kono ku ogpalabawon ka songo otow su dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, ogpokogsokodsokod do.
piglinglingotan to mgo Hudiu sikandin. Kagi ran kuwo ki Hisus, “Kon-u koy naan ognangoni ko sikoykow ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan woy ko kono? Ko sikoykow ian, nangoni koy on, kono koy on ogholosi.”
bagunbun
Toptopa’n ka kayu.
Ko waro mogligkat ka soin no lukos dio to Magboboot,” kagi to sikan no nabawian, “waro porom ogkohimu rin no ogkounawa to soini.”
ko-opos so doromdom
Nò, to nokouma on dio to mgo Parisiu, nig-insaan dan ka sikan no nabawian to noomonu kandin to nakakita on. Kagi rin kuwo kandan, “Nigpoiran din ka mata ku to basak woy pinapandop-ug a rin no kuntoon ogpakakita ad on.”
Du-on papitu no allow to songo simana.
Pamminog ka. Sikoykow, ogkaboros ka, no og-anak ka to lukos, no si Hisus ka igngaran nu.
Ogma-al-alukuyoy ka mgo buyag tongod ko du-on mgo lupuganon.
kamoy
Nò! Pogkita ni Simon to nohimu ni Hisus bahin to ngalap, nigluhud to tangkaan ni Hisus. Kagi rin ki Hisus to, “Buyag, mariu ka koddi su makasasalo ad no otow.”
dulat
apù
Di waro anak dan su ligkat to lawa ni Elisabit no kono og-anak, no kuntoon, buyag on olin sikandan no darua.
No konad on og-awoson to duon ka agad hontow no og-anad to duma ran tongod kanak su ogkatagaan ad on to tibo no mgo otow taman to kinaintokan to ngaran.
Nò,” kagi ni Hisus, “doyroyawi now ka goinawa now oyow kono ogkaparongan ka ilaw oyow kono ogkarusilom ka lawa now.
digus
dusù
Mohon–ing ka mgo ilawan duon to sikan no sinabong no piglimuran noy dio to ampow to sikan no baloy.
on
hoy-am
koblit
hodhod
Pakalikal ka pogul to kalò.
opus
lituk
galat
lingì
No, duon sagboka no igbuyag to mgo Hudiu no nigkagi ki Hisus to, “Maroyow no Maistru, og-inso a koykow ko nokoy ka litos no oghimuon ku no oyow ogkabogayan a to kouyagan no waro katamanan?”
Ogtukow kinow to igkarago ta woy ogsayoon tanow sikandin woy ogdakolon ta ka ngaran din. Ian su kuntoon on ka allow to Nati no Karniru no ogkuwon din on ka mgo otow no nigpasakup kandin su nakapanagana on sikandan to og-ugpo dio to kandin. No ka sikan, ian ogkounawaan ka boi no ogkaasawa on
Pogtokod ni Roda to kagi ian ni Pedro, narago lagboy. Di waro din puwasi su nigpallaguy no niglibong dio to solod to baloy. No nignangonan din ka mgo otow no nalimud to duon on si Pedro to gumawan.
batò
tabas
No ligkat to dakol no igkaratu din, songo ogbogayan kow to Magboboot to tibo no og-awosonon now su nasagboka kow on ki Hisu Kristu.
Mgo sulod no igdakoli ku to goinawa, soini ka igkaruwa no sulat ku kaniu. No ian tuud to sikan no mgo sulat su oyow ogkadoromdom now ka innangon ku kaniu oyow waro maroot no ogpakasolug dio to mgo doromdom now.
kisulàn
Kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Kuntoon, natuman on ka sikan no kagi to Magboboot no pigdinog now.”
Ogkounawa kow ian to mgo ulod, woy pinanganak kow to ulod. Ogmonuon now naan to ogligal oyow kono kow ogkalogparan dio to hapuy no wa katamanan?
Pigsagdaon ni Hisus ka mgo otow dio to mgo lunsud no nighimu rin ka mohon-ing no mgo igkoinuinu su waro dan hinulsuli ka mgo salo dan.
hawid
kamot
Ka siak diò to dagat, no warò ogligtuasan, siak no lanow.
Ogkounawa kow ro to sika mgo lobonganan su ko ogpitow ka mgo otow kaniu, inat to maroyow ka mgo oghimuon now di atag makasasalo kow naan no ogpatuutuu ka pogtuu now to Magboboot.
limu-mù
Ognangonan ku sikaniu no mgo otow dini to kona a now on ogkitoon taman to uromo no ogpakanangon kow on to, ‘Ogkapulusan sikandin no impohondini to ngaran to Magboboot.’ ”
Ka atoy warò tua-a su’gkamoù.
balu
Woy ligkat dod kandin, agad hontow no ogtuu kandin, ogkohimu on no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot. Di waro agad hontow no ogkohimu on no maroyow ko ogligkat to pogtuman din poron to mgo Balaod no inggalat ni Moisis.
gubak
su ligkat to pogkapirisu ku, ka tibo no mgo sundalu no ian talagbantoy to baloy to lagboy no igbuyag dio to ugpaanan to Ruma, lagkos to tibo no duma no mgo otow kai, nataga to ian ligkatan to pogkapirisu ku su suguanon a ni Kristu.
“Nò,” kagi to mgo hibatoon ni Hisus to, “Ko soini ka ogkoumaan to mgo patalaasawa, maroyow naan ko kono ki ogpangasawa.”
panago-is
Woy tibo kinow nig-un-unawa no nighimu to agad nokoy no maroot no ogkoibogan to lawa ta woy ka maroot no koiniatan to goinawa ta. No su sikan ian ka tahan no batasan ta, ogkoumaan kinow rod porom to logpad to Magboboot no ogkounawa to tibo no mgo otow no songo kono ogpaagad-agad kandin.
liningoy
Duon pad darua no lukos no songo nig-alap dan su igdongan dan to poghimatoy ni Hisus dio di dakol atag ka kandan no salo.
Ka angkal, tibò no mgo bokog no konò pad ogkalokò pu-un to ulu, li-og, bakalawan, lawa no du-on mgo gusuk, bubun woy pa-a mgo salowsow.
butiti
layun
solom
Duon busow no ogbakuson sikandin no inogo on ogpakangangang ka bato no komoron ka lawa rin woy ogbubuko ka bo-bo din. Ungod oghisakiti to busow ka lawa to bato no kono poron oglokaan to sika busow,” kagi to amoy to bato.
Di waro pad makasabut sikandan to sikan no Tahan no Kasulatan to Magboboot no nignangon to ogkootawan si Hisus.
li-og
su si Huan, sikandin ka sikan no suguanon no ian ka impasulat to Magboboot dongan, ‘Ogpohun-oon ku koykow ka suguanon ku oyow kandin ka ogpanagana to dalan no ogbayaan nu.’ ”
sudlay
No kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Di loin kuntoon, ko duon salapi now, mgo kabil, alapa now. Ko waro moirob now, baligya kow pa to kinabo now no boli kow pa to moirob.
Nig-inso dan, “Nokoy ka koykow no igpapitow no igkoin-inuan no oyow ogkitoon noy oyow ogtuu koy to kagi nu? Nokoy naan buwa?”
Ka sikan, ogkounawa to impasulat to Magboboot dongan tongod ki Abraham no nigkagi to, “Nigtuu on sikandin to kinagian to Magboboot no ligkat to sikan, nighimu on to Magboboot si Abraham no maroyow dio to kandin.”
Toroson ku ka kutu.
Nò, mgo sulod, ko duon otow no ogpasayluon now, songo ogpasayluon ku sikandin. No ko duon pa otow no duon nohimu rin no oglitos to ogpasayluon ku, ogpasayluon kud on ian dio to tangkaan ni Hisu Kristu su sikan ka songo ogpakabulig kaniu.
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to, “Kono kow ogkarago to ogpakarogil kow on to busow woy ogpaagad-agad on kaniu ka mgo busow ko ogdogilon now, kono now ogkaragoi to sikan. Ian now nasi karagoi ka ngaran now no nakasulat on dio to Langit.”
kalab
ko maniò
Ka dongan no mgo otow, ogpamahag pad su warò pad amana manggad dan.
dalap
bagkugung
Waro kabinunsuran to pogkouyag ku. Namatoy ad nokani di nouyag ad on taman to waro katamanan. No sikanak doka ogpakaboot ko hondoi ku ogpougpaa ka mgo nammatoy. Woy sikanak dod ka duon katondanan to ogpulas to sikan no ugpaan to mgo nammatoy.
Ligkat to mgo hinimuan dan, ogtokoron ta to duon igkaanad kandan no ogligkat to goinawa ran no ogkounawa to igkaanad to Balaod no ingkasulat ni Moisis. Woy ogkataga ki to ogtokoron dan ko nokoy ka maroyow no oghimuon, su songo kuwo ko ogpakanangon ka goinawa ran to duon salo dan woy songo kuwo ko ogligal ka goinawa ran no ogkagi to, “Waro a makasalo.”
Naan buwa to songo otow ko ian ta ignangon ko ka sikan no ingkasulat no Balaod ka ligkatan to mgo salo. Kono man, di ko waro ka sikan no Balaod, kono ki poron ogkataga ko nokoy ka salo ta. Pananglitan, ko waro pa nigkagi ka Balaod din to, “Kono kow koima to kalaglagan to duma now,” waro ki poron mataga to salo nanaan ko ogkoima ki to kalaglagan to duma ta.
Warò kow tibuga to otow no nigtalabau to baloy now su kandan ka ogbobo-ot to kalaglagan.Konò koy ogtibugon to mgo otow su ka pulus noy to kayu, diad on to kandan
No, nighihipanow on si Hisus dio to ilis to lanow no oghingaranan to Galilia no nigkita rin si Simon woy si Andres no patalahari no ogpanaraya dut ilis to lanow su talagngangalap man sikandan.
No kagi to mgo buyag to, “Nokoy naan do no og-awoson ta to og-inso dio to duma no mgo otow tongod ki Hisus su wa man, su tibo kinow man nakarinog to kagi no nigligkat ian to bo-bo din.”
Doromdoma now ka igsuli to Magboboot su ogkohoy-uan din ka mgo otow no ogtuu kandin, di oglogparan din ka mgo otow no kono ogtuu. Ogkohoy-uan kow rod ko ogparagason now ka poggongon now to pogkohoy-u rin, su ko kono now ogparagason ka pogtuu now, songo ogkaawo kow rod.
busow
amul
Kulang ka pogkohinug din; warò pad napalusi.
Pogdinog to duma no nanasindog no marani to krus din to nigkagi si Hisus, kagi ran, “Pamminog kow, og-umowon din si Ilias.”
sikuoy
Ian su ka mgo otow no nigtuu no taga Masidonia, woy ka dio to probinsia to Girisia, nakaroromdom to maroyow ko duon igkabogoy ran no igbulig dan to mgo otow no nigtuu no dio to Hirusalim no duon og-awoson.
Nò, su nohoy-uan koy to Magboboot, nigbogayan koy rin to katondanan to ognangonnangon to kinagian din. Sikan ian, kono ogmalotoy ka goinawa noy to og-uwang to sikan no ignangonnangon noy.
Nigkagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Alapa now ka duma no noutol now no ngalap.”
Kagi ni Pedro kandan to, “Sikaniu, natagaan now ka batasan noy no Hudiu to kono koy ogpakadumaruma woy kono koy ogpakapanumbaloy dio to otow no kono no unawa noy no Hudiu. Di ka Magboboot ka nigpasabut kanak to kono din no litos ko ogkoison ku ka agad hontow.
gatas
Di nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin to, “Duon inkasulat dongan to kagi to Magboboot no nigkagi to, ‘Kono no koonon do ka igkouyag to mgo otow di songo awoson dan ka tibo no kinagian to Magboboot.’ ”
iria
Di sikaniu, nataga ka Magboboot ko pila no aslag ka bulbul now.
tangkung
pandawot
tukod
pamuka
Tongod ko du-on amigu ta no maroyow to pogdumaruma ta di ko du-on kanta rin di warad sikandin kai to tanò, ogka-alimotow ka ko ogpakarinog ka to sikan no kanta ko manokal pad kandin.
lagkos
balitì
Ka woig [river] no siak, du-on ogligtuasan diò to dibabò.
Nakabayo si Hisus dio to lunsud to Nasarit di dio nig-ugpo to lunsud to Kapirnaum no dio to ilis to dakol no lanow to Galilia. Soini no lunsud to Kapirnaum, sakup ian to lunsud to Sabulun woy Niptali.
Kono kow ogpaboot to mgo otow no og-anad poron kaniu no ognangon to og-awoson to ogpoobos ki no ogsimboon ta ka mgo diwata to Magboboot. No ka igpatuu kaniu to ogkagion dan, oghonduonon to duon kun impapitow to Magboboot kandan no mgo pootow-otow. Di kono kow ian ogpamminog ko duon ignangon dan to oglogparan kow kun ko kono kow ogpaagad-agad to ig-anad dan. Ian su ka sikan no mgo otow, ogparakoldakol do duon sikandan. Dokad di ubat do duon ka ignangon dan. Waro pulus ka ig-anad dan su ogligkat do duon to mgo doromdom to mgo otow no kono no litos.
Waro nigkita ku no Dakol no Ampuanan dio to sikan no lunsud su ka Magboboot no ian ka Lagboy no Igbuyag woy Mamabogbog to tibo, woy ka Nati no Karniru, ian ka ampuanan dan.
Nò, sikaniu no nigtuu, ko waro kow mataga ko nokoy ka maroyow no oghimuon now, buyu kow to Magboboot no ogkabogayan kow su magaan ogpambogoy to maroyow no pogsabut ta no kono ogpokogsondit ka goinawa rin to sikan no igbogoy rin.
Ka kinurus to mgo Bisayà, sagboka rò ka igbalabag no kayu no ka tu-ud, ig-alow to busow.
Ogpalingowlingow rò du-on; konò din ogsagmanon.
gisois
Mgo sulod, kono ta ogmarooton ka duma ta su ka otow no ogkagi to maroot to duma rin woy ko ogdoisokon din, ogkaam-ampawan din ka goinawa rin to sikan no Balaod to Magboboot. Di ko og-am-ampawan ta ka Balaod to Magboboot, kono tad on ogpaag-agaran di ogkoiling ko talagboot ki ro duon.
lunsud
No, nanlibong on ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus dio to kandin no innangonnangon dan ki Hisus ka tibo no nabayaan dan mgo hinimuan dan. Pogkaponga, nigduma ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din dio to awayan dio to marani to songo ugpaan no nighingaranan to Bitsaida.
tarapal
walingwaling
Di ka mgo talag-uyamu, pogkita ran to anak to tagtuun, nigpaal-alukuyoy no kagi ran to, ‘Soini ka anak to tagtuun no sikandin ian ka ogpakasoip to amoy rin. Nò, himatayan tanow sikandin oyow ka tano no igkagalat poron kandin, kanta on.’ ”
Og-inso-on ku ko pila ka igpo-ulì din.
pugad
Nò, sikan no Pagkoonan to Paligad, ogpokouma on ko ogkapawo. Nò, nataga si Hisus to noumaan on sikandin to pog-uli din ligkat to soin no kalibutan no oghondio to Amoy rin dio to Langit. Layun no duon goinawa rin to mgo sakup din kai to soin no kalibutan woy impatokod din ka dakol no goinawa rin taman to nig-uli dio to Langit.
Nigbabansagon sikandan to, “Mgo pinanganak ni Israil, bulig kow. Soinid naan ka otow no ogpan–anad to tibo no mgo otow dio to agad hondoi su oyow ogmaroot ka goinawa ran kanta no mgo Hudiu, woy to Balaod ni Moisis, woy to soini no Dakol no Ampuanan ta. Kono no sikan do, ka pighimu ni Pablo. Di nigligsoman din ka soini no Ampuanan ta su duon ka kono no Hudiu no pigduma rin dio to solod to soini no ampuanan ta no noindanan to Magboboot.”
usig
Pinabayo to soini ogkatuman ka kagi to talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan no si Isaias no nigtagno bahin to mgo otow dio to,
Di nigsundulsundul si Pedro taman do to lama to baloy to Labow to mgo Talagpanubad. Nò, to nigdatong sikandin dio to lama, nigpinnuu sikandin no nig-amut to mgo ogbantoy oyow ogkitoon din ko ogmonuon si Hisus.
go-od
pakang
Ka igkatatolu no allow duon ka kasal dio to lunsud to Kana no sakup to Galilia. Duon dio ka inoy ni Hisus no nig-amut to kasalan.
Ko og-ayaton ka to ogpasalò, oggawayan ka.
Igkaruwa, ko duon kabogbogan ku to ognangon to kagi no ogligkat to Magboboot woy ko ogpakasabut a pa to tibo no maralom no pogdoromdom no igpohitaga rin kanak, woy ko ogkataga a pa to tibo no katagaanan no nigligkat dio to kandin, woy ko duon igkatimul to pogtuu ku ki Hisus oyow ogkahalin on ka songo bubungan, di ko waro goinawa ku to mgo otow, waro pulus ku.
Titibon si Luluy
Nig-alap ni Hisus ka lukos dio to waro otow no pigkulitok din ka mgo talinga to lukos to mgo tinuru din. Kaponga sikan, nig-ilob si Hisus woy nigsamsam din ka dilo to sika otow to ngingi rin.
Di atag, sikan no mgo otow no ogtuu on to innangon din, sikan ian ka mgo otow no ogmalogoton dan ka kagi to Magboboot.
Ko ogmamagaliug ki, dipindi ko ignangon ta ka tagbaloy ko pila ka allow woy ka ogpo-uli-on.
“Dio to Pandatuan to Magboboot, duon no ogko-unawa no malig-ot so gumawan. Poomoti now to ogsolod to sikan no malig-ot no gumawan. Nò, ogpoko-uma ka allow no oglokoban to Magboboot ka gumawan. Mohon-ing ka ogsolod porom di kono ogpakatood. Sikaniu no dio kow rod to libuwasan ogbunsud kow to ogtoktok to lokob no ogkagi kow to, ‘Buyag, pulasi koy ro,’ no ogtabak din to, ‘Waro a mogtokod kaniu.’
lupùv
Kagi to sagboka, “Usì, bubu-og ki.” Ogtabak ka dangob to, “Ho-o, ogbubu-og ki, ian,” no ogpabugbu-ogoy on.
Pilimun, ogbuyu a to Magboboot no Amoy ta woy ki Hisu Kristu no Lagboy no Igbuyag ta oyow ogkohoy-uan ka woy ogbogayan ka ran to maawang no goinawa.
Woy nigsulatan ku rod sikaniu tongod kandin su oyow ogpitawon ku ko ogtuman kow to tibo no ignangon ku.
Duon mgo pananglitan ni Hisus to mgo otow. Kagi rin, “Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu. Sikan no otow no kono ogbayo to gumawan to alad to karniru no ogpamanoik do duon dio to alad, panakow ka sikan no otow woy pan-agow.
Ka tagbanwa no Parisiu, pogkita rin to waro nig-unug si Hisus to batasan dan to ogpanhugas woy ogkoon, noinuinu sikandin.
Niglangkob dio to paa ni Hisus no nigpasalamatan din si Hisus to nabawian on ka kogang rin. Taga Samaria ka sikan no otow no niglibong.
Kon-u noy inpalopow sikoykow dio to baloy noy woy kon-u ka nigkoilangan to kinabo no nigkinaboan noy sikoykow?
Nò, sikan ian to nabolu ad on to sikan no mgo otow no nigkagi a to, ‘Ka goinawa ran, ungod ogsuwoy no kono ogkoiniat no og-unug to batasan ku.’
oson
lantao
Ian su noiniatan to Amoy rin no ka Magboboot to, ko nokoy ka duon to Amoy, sikan dod lagboy ka duon to Anak din no si Hisus.
kai
nigsolod to baloy to Magboboot no nigkoon si Dabid to paan no intubad dio to Magboboot. Di ka kagi to Balaod ta, ka mgo talagpanubad do poron ka ogkoon, di nigkoon ni Dabid woy songo nigbogayan din ka mgo sakup din.”
malit
Ko pighutuk dan insaa, nigtonggak on si Hisus no kagi rin kuwo kandan, “Ko hontow kai kaniu no waro salo, kandin ka oghun-a ogdogpak to batu.”
Natangusan si Adag.
tigbal dò
Utukan to sampow
bulit
bungkù
giugiuvs
nanoy
Ian su nighimatayan dan ka mgo otow no nigtuu koykow woy ka mgo talagnangon to kinagian nu. Omunaan no impoinum nud sikandan to langosa su litos ian to ogkasulian sikandan.”
puti
Woy duon putow no ig-atang to mgo sosolobon dan no ogkounawa to ongil. Ko oglayang sikandan, ka daging to mgo pakpak dan, ogkoiling to daging to mohon-ing no sakayan no kalisa no ogganuyon to mgo kuddo no og-agpas no pallaguy no ogtangko to usig dan dio to dakol no samuk.
Ogkarago sikandin su konad on og-insoon ka mgo salo din.”
buntiak
Di si Pablo, nahan din no kono no maroyow ko ogdumoon dan su to dio pad sikandan to Pampilia, nig–ongkod si Markos kandan no nig–uli on no warad nigparagas to ogbulig kandan.
Ian su ka sikan no mgo maroot no oghimuon dan no igholos dan, igkasipod ta to ogpanhingaranan ta.
Ka lawa ta, sagboka ro di mohon-ing ka sumpul din. Ogkounawa rod ki Hisus. Songo sagboka ro ka lawa rin di mohon-ing ki ka nigtuu no nohimu on no sumpul to lawa rin.
Di ka nighimu ni Kristu, waro nig-unawa to nighimu to sikan no Labow to mgo Talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu no to kasagboka ro to songo tuid, nigsolod to sikan no Kinaroyawan no Sinabong to ampuanan dan ka og-alap to langosa to ayam. Di si Kristu, waro atag nighutuk to pogpatulalug to kandin no langosa,
Kono kow og-unug to mgo batasan to mgo otow no kono ogtuu no kai to kalibutan. Di atag, bogayi now ka Magboboot to oyow ogkahalin on ka goinawa now ligkat to ungod ogkoiam on ka mgo doromdom now. No ian su oyow ogpakasabut kow on ko nokoy ka ogkoiniatan to Magboboot, no ian ka maroyow no batasan no ogkoiniatan din no kono ogkaalang-alang.
Sikoddi no si Huan, nigkita kud ka tibo soini woy ogtitigus a kuntoon oyow songo ogtuu kow. Malogot man ka kagi ku; ogkasaligan ka kagi ku.
Pigbuyu kud si Titu to oghondio to kaniu woy duon songo sulod ta to pogtuu no nigparuma ku kandin. No og-inso a ko nigpaginpulus si Titu dio to kaniu? Wa man su nokog-unawa koy ro to tuud noy woy to batasan noy.
lalud
tagom
hiabhiyab
Nò mgo sulod, koiniati now on ian to oyow ogpakanangonnangon kow to kagi no igsabuk to Magboboot dio to goinawa now. Di do kow ogsapari ka mgo otow no ogkagi to loinloin no mgo kinagian no songo igsabuk to Gimukud to Magboboot to goinawa ran.
uak
Ogtotomog ki diò to taliwarò to turakan no igsugbuk ta ka sikan no bogas to katumbal.
bogbog
maro-ot to pogpitow
su duon bugtung no anak din no boi no sampulu woy darua ka tuid din no kai naan do to liog din ka goinawa rin. Nò, to nighipanow si Hisus no oghondio to baloy ni Hairu, nalingotan sikandin to mohon-ing no mgo otow no ogduma kandin.
Ka igkalima no diwata to Magboboot, songo imbus-ug din ka tagu to kandin no boung dio to pinnuuanan to pandatuan to sikan no magintalunon no nigligkat to dagat. Pogkaponga to pogbus-ug, nigmarusilom lagboy ka pandatuan din. Nò, nanakagat to mgo otow ka mgo dilo dan su masakit lagboy ka nangoram dan.
magolgol
sagboka
Kagi to sikan no boi, “Buyag, waro igsakug nu; maralom lagboy ka balun. Hondoi ka naan ogkuo to sika woig no igkouyag ku?
bodbod
mannalinga
Kò ka ogtaltalasak su kalagak ka.
Ian su ka Gimukud to Magboboot ka ogpasabut to kanta no goinawa to nohimu kinow on no mgo anak to Magboboot.
pintik
Nataligpuga a su naan ku ko nabogayan on.
Og-inagakon dut kakoy ka hari.
No ogtangkap sikandan kai to tano woy oglinglingotan dan ka dakol no lunsud no indakoli to Magboboot to goinawa no nig-ugpaan to mgo sakup din. Dokad di to ogkoulugan sikandan to hapuy no ogligkat to langit no ogkoubus sikandan no ogkamatoy.
Gowgawa ka dinapil oyow ogkagangu.
balò
Nigpasulatan ni Pilatu ka manipis no kayu no imparokot dan dio to ampow to ulu ni Hisus. Soini ka impasulat din. Kagi, “Hisus no taga Nasarit, Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu.”
Di kono koy ogkounawa to mohon-ing no ognangonnangon to kinagian to Magboboot no ian do tuud dan ka ogpanalapi. Di sikanami atag, ian do tuud noy to og-anad to kinagian to Magboboot su sikandin ka nigsugu kanami. Woy ka ig-anad noy, lagboy no maroyow dio to tangkaan din su suguanon koy ni Hisu Kristu.
umos
ko-opos so goinawa
Pakabunanat ka mgo ambow; oghilabot to kono no unawa rin.
Koddi ka Kakoy to koot-otawan, ka tuud ku to oghondini a to tano oyow ogpamanghoon ku woy ogpangabangan ku ka mgo otow no nalagak dio to dalan no oghondio to koddi oyow og-awoon ku ka mgo salo dan.
Sikan ian ko waro kud on maaguanta ka igkasasow ku kaniu, pinohondio kud on si Timoteo to kaniu oyow oghitagoon a rin ko noomonu on ka pogtuu now. Ka kuwo koy ko nakatood buwa si Satanas no og-ol-olog kaniu no naraat on buwa ka talabau noy to nig-anad noy kaniu.
Agad hontow no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu, no ligkat kandin ogkoiniat no ogpaagad-agad to Magboboot, ogkabaybayaran.
Di ka katondanan ni Hisus dio to Langit to igpataliwaro kanta to Magboboot, madmaroyow to sikan no katondanan no ogpakaalap to sikan no tahan no mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu. Ian su madmaroyow ka dalan no ogkohimu on to sikan no iam no sabut to Magboboot, su dio ogligkat to sikan no madmaroyow no innangon din.
No kagi ni Santiago to mgo duma rin to, “Kuntoon, soini ka igtambag ku kaniu tongod to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no ogtuu to Magboboot. Kono tad ogpogoson sikandan to ogtuman to Balaod ni Moisis.
Pitawa nu ko nalokoban ka mgo bintana ko ogpakato-od no og-uran.
Napolaan ad to batasan nu no anoy kad ogkalasing.
higod
Niggamit ni Hisus ka mgo pananglitan su oyow ogkatuman ka innangon to talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no nigkagi to, “Og-anaron ku sikandan pinabayo to pananglitan. Ignangon ku kandan ka mgo malogot no noholos ligkat to poghimu to kalibutan.”
nanoy
pasaylu
Ko du-on ogsukut to kuddò di naruad, agad nokoy ka igbogoy to nakapurut to kuddò.
hindang
Ogpanggawoy, no agad nokoy ka ogkaroromdom dan, ogparagason dan do to oghimu. Woy ogparakoldakol. Ogpaampow-ampow ka kandan no igkarago, no igpariralom dan ka dakol poron no goinawa ran to Magboboot.
lingow
Kagi rin kandan to, “Sasakiti amana so goinawa ku to soin no igkasasow ku no inat to ogkamatoy ad. Palinggalat kow kai di kono kow oghirogo.”
tinok
Bonol
Madmaroyow ko oghikotan ka liog to sikan no otow to batu no galingan woy igdogpak sikandin dio to dagat to sika dakol no iglogpad to Magboboot kandin ko ogpatambaboon din koddi ka agad sagboka to soini no mgo bato oyow og-ongkoran din ka pogtuu rin koddi.
Nigtabak si Hisus no kagi rin, “Soini ro ka oghimuon now. Tuu kow koddi su koddi ka nigsugu din kai to kaniu.”
No ka sikan, ogtokoron ta to ka poghimu ku no kono no litos, kono ogligkat to tu-tuu no goinawa ku, di ogligkat atag to tahan no maroot no koiniatan to lawa ku.
No sikan ian no nighawi on to tagtu-un ka inoy.
Kohimonui a nu.
Natokow ki ki Amutatoy.
No ka nigmouy–uyunoy to sikan, nigsubla to kohop–atan no otow.
sugnu
gugud
Pogpitow ni Pablo to mgo pogbuyagon, nigkita rin to mgo Parisiu ka songo baad woy mgo Sadusiu ka dangob no baad. No su natagaan ni Pablo to nigloinloin ka pogtuu to sikan no mgo otow nigbabansagon to, “Mgo sulod, Parisiu a woy songo Parisiu ka mgo kaap–apuan ku. Nokoy naan to duon a kai to tangkaan now kuntoon su og–in–insaan a tongod to pogtuu ku to duon allow uromo no ogkouyag to Magboboot ka mgo nammatoy.”
Ian su mohuri a nohimu no suguanon ni Hisus. Ogkaalang-alang ka goinawa ku to oghingaranan a to suguanon a rin su woy a nigtuu kandin, no nigbaybayaran ku pad ka mgo nigpasakup to Magboboot.
Nò, niglibulung ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy ka mgo tahuronon to mgo Hudiu no nigmoin-insooy sikandan ko nokoy ka oghimuon dan. Nò, nigbogayan dan ka sika mgo sundalu to dakol no salapi
Ko ogsalop ka allow, ogbunsud ogkausilom.
toktok
ni
parayag
no dio ku pad hunnoi innangonnangon to mgo otow to lunsud to Damasku. No to poghutuk innangonnangon ku dio to Hirusalim, woy dio to agad hondoi no lunsud no duon to probinsia to Hudia, woy dio to mgo ugpaan to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. Ian su oyow songo ogkohimu to ogsonditan dan on ka mgo batasan dan no maroot woy ogkahalin dan on ka goinawa ran dio to Magboboot oyow mgo ogmaroyow on ka mgo no batasan dan no igmalogot to pig–ongkoran dan on ka mgo maroot no batasan dan.
doipag
Inat payow ka langlanguan nu
papaganò
Manuk ta so-ini?
Si Tikiku, indakoli ta to goinawa no patalasulod tanow to pogtuu ta to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus woy masalig no suguanon din to og-alap-alap to nangnangonon din. No ognangonan kow ni Tikiku to tibo no ingkabayo ku kai to oyow ogkataga kow ko ogkoomonu a kai woy ko nokoy ka oghimuon ku.
how-as
aput
“Songo nigdinog now ka sugu dongan dio to minuna tanow no awoson no ogtumanon nu ian ka impangulibot nu dio to Magboboot.”
Ko ogpanligad ka mgo otow dio to krus, nighabian dan si Hisus woy nigsumpalit dan sikandin no kagi ran, “Pitow ka naan! Koykow ka oggulak to Dakol no Ampuanan no oghimuon nu ka dangob to tatolu ro no allow,
bunbun
No ka mgo boi no asawa ran, songo og-awoson to maroyow so batasan dan no litos to ogtahuron to mgo otow woy to kono dan ogtalosobon ka mgo duma ran woy to kono no ogmagolgol to agad nokoy woy to ogkasaligan sikandan.
Gamutan ki.
bagting
isanum
Kono no sikan do ka igpatuu to Magboboot to ogboboot sikandin ko nokoy ka oghimuon din, su pogkalugoy, ka kaap-apuan ta no si Isaak, nig-asawa on ki Ribika no naboros sikandin to sosoping.
No ka sikan no boi, nakapallaguy on no nokohondio to holholawan no impanagana to Magboboot kandin. No dio tamongi sikandin taman to 1,260 no allow.
Pinabayo to kagi nu no ian malogot, indani nu sikandan to ogtuman to koykow no goinawa.
sili-an
Woy ogmanokal ko du-on ogli-ag
Nò, mgo sulod, nigtukow ka goinawa ku su lagboy ku ogkasaligan sikaniu.
No ko nigpokootow si Hisus kai to tano, nigpoobos no nigpaagad-agad to Magboboot taman to kamatayon din. Agad to dio ogkamatoy to krus, waro nigbalibad.
Sikan ian, agad to magaan porom ogkamatoy to igkabuyagi rin, di ligkat do ki Abraham, impaanak pad sikandan to Magboboot. No ka mgo pinanganak dan, nohimu on no mohon-ing su ogkounawa to mgo bituon dio to langit woy songo ogkounawa to mgo bayokbok dio to dagat no kono ogkasool.
No nakakita a ki Hisus no kagi rin kanak to, ‘Agpas ka awo kai to lunsud to Hirusalim su ka mgo otow kai, kono ogtuu to igmalogot nu to impohitaga ku koykow,’
tongod
Sikan ian no og-inso a kaniu ko nahan now no waro igkoulii to mgo Hudiu no nakarogpak on? Duon dod man igkoulii ran, di su waro dan pamminoga ka kinagian to Magboboot, nohimu on no dalan to oyow ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, ogkapangabangan to kandan no mgo salo. No ian to oyow ogkoima on ka mgo Hudiu.
dogmìv
nokal
Dio dan isabal ka lawa ni Hisus su marani woy su magaan on ogpokouma ka igbunsud to Allow to mgo Hudiu to Oghimoloy.
lipuas
dangob
patik
udling
Poghipanow woy ni Hisus dio to dalan, duon otow no nigkagi ki Hisus to, “Agad hondoi ka ogdolog, ogdumaruma a koykow.”
Malogot woy matuwarong ka pogboboot din. Ian su ka mabantug no boi no maroot so batasan, niglogparan to Magboboot su nig-ayat din ka mgo otow kai to kalibutan to oyow og-ilingan dan ka kandin to mgo maroot no batasan din. Woy niglogparan to Magboboot ka sikan no boi su nighimatayan din ka mgo suguanon to Magboboot.”
Bogayi koy to koonon noy kuntoon to soini no allow.
Ong-ongora nu to kalayati to bistira.
Ka mgo asu, ko ogdogosan, ogkilkil to pa-a ran.
Du-on dakol no pulus ko ogpa-agad-agad ki to innangon to amoy ta.
Sikan ian, sulod, oglangub a poron no ogsugu koykow oyow ogpakatuman ka to ignangon ku su duon katondanan ku ligkat ki Kristu to ogsugu poron.
Ko og-init ki to woig, igdapig ta su oghibalawan ta ka woig.
Dokad di, nigtokod ka mgo otow to Hudiu si Alihandro no sikan ian to nigbabansagon sikandan to nigkagi to, “Mabogbog si Diana no ian magboboot to mgo taga Episu.” No sikan do ian ka imbabansagon dan taman to daruwa no uras.
Agad nokoy allowa, duon kai kaniu ka mgo publi. Di sikoddi atag, kona a no malugoy dini to kaniu.”
isu-os
Ko nighagtong nigkagi si Hisus, pig-uwangan din sikandan no kagi rin kuwo kandan, “Tinawaa now ka Gimukud to Magboboot.”
halin
Tagonliag
Ka dakol lagboy so goinawa to songo otow dio to mgo duma rin, sikan ian ka ogpakatobus to kamatayon dan.
Ka poghulup to patiukan, songo simana rò ka pog-ugpò dan no ogbugkal on ka oghalin.
Nighondio si Hudas to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy mgo igbuyag to mgo talagbantoy to Ampuanan dan no nigsasabut sikandan tongod to naroromdoman din to igpanabod din si Hisus oyow ogkarakop dan.
tandog
Siibon to bakosan ka manuk.
Nò, insabuk dan to palanggana woy inhatod dan dut boi woy imbogoy to boi dio to inoy din.
Warò otow no pig-umaag din ko konon pinog-unawa rò.
[Ian oghingaranan no “valley” ininglis] ka napù no ogpakataliwarò to darua no bubungan.
kapayas
Sikan ian to nalimud on ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus woy ka mgo pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu su oyow ogmaal–alukuyoy tongod to sikan.
To tiglabung on nokouma si Hisus woy ka mgo hibatoon din no nigtutugon on dio to lamisaan,
Nò, mgo sulod, kanta tibo no nigtuu ki Hisus, warad on ogpakaatang to pogkasabuti ta. No ian tad ogkounawaan ka alung to ispiu su dii to kanta no batasan ogkakitaan ka karoyawon to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. Ka sikan no karoyawon, ungod ogkatimtimulan taman to lagboy kid on ogpokounug kandin su sikan ka oghimuon to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no ian Gimukud to Magboboot.
No ian noy imparuma kandin ka duma ta to pogtuu no ogtahuron to tibo no mgo nigtuu no dio to agad hondoi no mgo ugpaan su ka pognangonnangon din to Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus.
Ian ta ogsugilonon to balubatò
bunuli
Pilpila nu oyow ogkoirogò.
Nighondio si Hisus to Hirusalim su magaan on ka pagkoonan to mgo Hudiu no oghingaranan to Pagkoonan to Paligad.
Ka lawa rin ka inhusoy to mgo salo ta su namatoy on to krus oyow kono kid on ogkalogparan. Di ka nighimu rin, kono no litos to kanta ro no salo su litos to salo to tibo no mgo otow kai to ampow to tano.
Ogpakoro-korò ki to kiloy ta ko sikan ki pad nighimata.
pad
Ka mgo otow no nakasakoy to jeep no nokogdusmul to olin no sakayan, no-umaan to mgo pako-id to warò dan matagoi.
Tigbal ta rò igpataga.
Kagi to boi to, “Malogot ian Igbuyag, di agad ka mgo asu ogkoonon dan atag ka timu no ogkoulug dio to diralom to lamisaan to igbuyag dan.”
pantig
Nigtabak si Hisus to mgo hibatoon ni Huan to, “Uli kow on dio ki Huan woy nangoni now sikandin to tibo no pigkita now woy pigdinog now kuntoon. Inangon now to ogpakakita on ka mgo nabutud, ogpokohipanow on ka mgo napulid, woy nabawian on ka kogang dut mgo ibungon; warad on ka igkaligsomi ran. Ogpakarinog on ka mgo nabongol woy ogkabuhi on ka mgo nammatoy. Woy songo ognangonan ku ka mgo publi to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon ligkat to Magboboot.”
Tagasan
Ka mgo talagbulig to pogbuyagon to mgo otow no nigtuu, songo og-awoson to maroyow so batasan dan no litos to ogtahuron to mgo otow, woy to oyow ogkasaligan ko nokoy ka ignangon dan. Woy og-awoson to kono oglasinglasing woy kono oggogolgol to salapi.
Ko ogko-on ki to du-on bokog no du-on pad sapù, og-anguson ta to og-il-il.
Nignangonan a to tibo no mgo sundalu ran no nigman-untud to mgo kuddo, 200,000,000.
Songo pogpurut dò to asin, oghingaranan to songo pogpindit
Pogkouma ran on to hagoran no dio to gumawan to baloy to mgo sundalu, pigtukoy on to mgo sundalu si Pablo su dakol ian ka samuk to mgo otow.
Samboy a ko du-on tugsuk nu.
Nò, kuntoon to nokouma on ka pogtuu ta kandin, ka sikan no Balaod, konad on ogpakatalipun kanta.
soksokon
Palangosaan to manuk ka tubaran
To nigligad ka hon-om no allow nigduma ni Hisus si Pedro woy si Santiago woy si Huan no hari ni Santiago no nigtakorog sikandan dio to matikang no bubungan no waro loin no duma ran.
“Sikanami,” kagi ni Pedro, “Ogpakapamalogot koy to tibo no nighimu ni Hisus dio to lunsud to Hirusalim, woy dio to duma no mgo ugpaan to mgo Hudiu, woy to nighimatayan to mgo taga Hudia sikandin no impalansang dan sikandin to krus.
omot
Ka tibo no dangob no mgo ogpan-anad no nokohun-a koddi to ogbantoy to mgo karniru porom, ogkounawa sikandan to mgo ogpan-agow woy mgo ogpanakow. Di ka mgo ogtuu koddi, ogkounawa sikandan to mgo karniru ku. Omunaan waro nigpamminog ka mgo karniru kandan.”
Ko nakaponga nigkagi si Hisus, nigdakop to mgo igbuyag poron. Di waro makatood sikandan su waro pad mokouma ka allow rin.
lablab
Ko iam pad mo-ulug ka pangi, konò no litos no ogkapurut.
Kagi to lukos, “Naborosan a to asawa ku; naam pà ko og-anak no warò a.”
pilang
supmat
Di ka tu-tuu ian no tinuuan ta no imbogoy to Magboboot, ian ogkounawaan ka kono ogkawoil no ogpounturan to baloy. No duon impasulat to kagi to Magboboot to, “Nataga ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta ko hontow ka tu-tuu no sakup din.” No ka dangob no impasulat din kagi, “Ka sikan no otow no og-abin to nigpasakup to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta, og-awoson to og-ongkoran din on ka tibo no maroot no batasan.”
Ka relo, songo du-on anamag.
Woy songo nigkagi to: “Ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu, dalong kow to igkarago to duma no mgo sakup to Magboboot no ogsayo kandin.”
Pog-anad ni Hisus dio to anaranan to mgo og-ampu, nigsolod ka sagboka no lukos no pigbusawan on.
lo-upas
tarong
Ko konò ki ogkasagman to duma ta, ogpatokod to mariù ki kandin.
sangoy
Ko ogpamula, unawa to mgo "seedling" su ig-ayad-ayad ka igkapamula.
Ko du-on darua no ogpalawod no ka sagboka oghun-a, og-agapan ka oghun-a.
No ignangon dan to nigtuu on sikandan to Magboboot, dokad di ligkat to mgo hinimuan dan no maroot, ogkounawa to ogligalon dan sikandin. Dorooti sikandan no kono ogpaagad-agad to insugu kandan. Sikan ian to kono no litos no ogkasaligan sikandan to oghimu to agad nokoy no maroyow no oghimuon.
Agad matikang woy ko masagkop, makopal woy ko manipis no igliu to baloy woy ko lama, ogkohingaranan no alad.
takow
Sunud no allow, ka mgo otow no nagalat dio to doipag to lanow nigdoromdom dan to nigkita ran to sagboka ro no balutu. Woy songo nataga sikandan to waro nakasakoy si Hisus to sikan no balutu no nig-unturanan to mgo hibatoon ni Hisus no wa nigduma si Hisus kandan; wa mog-untud si Hisus.
Ko diad to longod ni Hisus, nig-inso ni Hisus kandin to, “Nokoy buwa ka ogkoiniatan nu dii to koddi?” Nigtabak ka nabutud to, “Maistru, ogkoiniat a porom oyow oghutuk a pad ogpakakita.”
Ka sika paan no ogpoiran nu to mani no og-akoban nu, sikan ka nakahalisok on ka mani.
Ka manuk no nig-atolug on, og-olon to sampulù woy lalima no allow woy ko sampulu woy hon-om no allow woy ogpigsò.
Waro katagaanan ta tongod to amoy rin mgo inoy rin woy ko duon mgo kaap-apuan din. Woy waro ingkasulat tongod ko kon-u nootow woy ko kon-u mamatoy sikandin. Sikan ian to ogkoiling rod si Milkisidik to Anak to Magboboot su waro katamanan to pogpanubad din.
Ian su tongod to soini no samuk kai kuntoon, songo kuwo no ogkoogotan kinow su waro man igkatabak ta ko ogkoin–insoon ki ko manio to nasamuk kid,” kagi to kunsial.
Naalang-alang ka pogtuu now su ko duon duma now no ogpakasalo kaniu, dio kow ogpohusoy to otow no waro nigtuu. Madmaroyow poron ko ogbalagaron ta ko duon ogbayadbayad kanta woy ko oglukuon ki.
A-alang ki su nataloy-uan ki.
onow
Di duon inso to sikan no talag-anad to Balaod oyow ogtokoron poron ni Hisus to litos on ka sika an-anayan no inso din. Sikan ian no nig-inso din ki Hisus to, “Hontow naan ka duma ku?”
No pog–uli dan dio to lunsud to Hirusalim, namanoik on dio to nig–ugpaan dan no baloy woy nigsolod on to songo sinabong duon to ampow to sikan no baloy. Ka nigsolod no mgo otow si Pedro, si Huan, si Santiago, si Andris, si Pilipi, si Tomas, si Bartolomi, si Matiu, woy ka sangoy ni Santiago no anak ni Alpiu. Duon pad si Simon no oghingaranan dan to Siloti. Woy duon dod si Hudas no anak to dangob no Santiago.
Nighipanow on sikandan no nokouma on dio to songo pinamula no kayu no oghingaranan to Gitsimini. Kagi ni Hisus to mgo hibatoon din, “Kai kow pa ogpaminnuu su dutun a pad og-ampu.”
tigbal dò
Og-alam a to og-ugpa-an ku no baloy.
Hontow ni Lugtom si Sanglit?
Oghibukhibuk no ogwo-il ka mgo bakotin.
Woy dio to sikan no lunsud no nignangonan ku ka mgo otow to, ‘Kono no sakup ku sikaniu,’ oghingaranan sikandan no anak to Magboboot no ian do ligkatan to kinabui.”
Nò, tongod to mgo nammatoy, songo kuwo buwa ko duon otow no og-inso ko ogkoomonu on ko ogkouyag sikandan woy nokoy ka ogkohimuan to lawa ran ko ogkouyag on?
Nò, nigkagian ni Hisus ka mgo otow to, “Tibo kow no naboloy hondini kow to koddi woy ka tibo no nigtiang to mabogat su ogpohimalayon ku sikaniu.
lanas
Ko du-on ogkapulid ka batò, ogkakongkong ka limang no pa-a.
Di narakop on ka sikan no magintalunan woy ka ubaton no ian talagnangon to kinagian din no nighimu to mgo kabolongbolonganan dio to tangkaan to sikan no magintalunan. No ka sikan no kabolbolonganan, ian din impanggawoy to sikan no mgo otow no nigpangotoban to ngaran to sikan no magintalunan woy ka nigsimba to inotow-otow rin. Nò, to manokal pad sikandan, igdogpak sikandan dio to ogliabliab no hapuy no asupri.
Songo mohon-ing ka mgo otow no og-abin no talagnangon sikandan to Magboboot no ognangonnangon to kagi to Magboboot, di ubat do duon. Ogpakasuwoy ka mohon-ing no mgo otow pinabayo kandan.
No ka tibo no mgo pogbuyagon, nigpaagad–agad on to kagi ni Gamaliel. Nigpalibong dan on woy si Pedro no pigpabarasan dan sikandan. Woy pigsaparan dan to, “Kono now ignangonnangon ka ngaran ni Hisus.” Pogkaponga no nigpalibuwas dan on ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus.
pi-pì
Di ko ogpakakagi pa ka paa ta to, “Kono a no igsumpul to soi lawa su nokoy naan to kono ad no bolad,” igsumpul dod man ian to lawa ta ka paa ta.
to-od
To nakataliwaro on ka allow to ogmougtu, nighondio man do ka tagtuun to pinamula oyow ogpamitow to duma no mgo otow no ogbulig ogtalabau dio to pamulaanan din. Duon nigkita rin no mgo lukos no ogmanasindog do duon dio to palingki no waro talabau ran.
Ka Magboboot ka nigpangabang kanta woy nig-abin kinow rin oyow ogkohimu kinow on no sakup din no og-unug to tibo no goinawa rin. Di ka pog-abin din kanta, waro nigligkat to mgo hinimuan ta no maroyow, di nigligkat atag to kandin no tuud woy nigligkat dod to dakol no pogkohoy-u rin kanta. Dongan no waro pad nohimu ka soini no kalibutan, nigboot ka Magboboot to ogkohoy-uan kinow rin ligkat to ogkasagboka kinow on ki Hisu Kristu.
kayangkang
kakoy
dogpak
dulis
“No pitow kow. Ka lunsud now, ogkabalagad on no woy a ro ogkitaa hutuk to allow no ogpakakagi kow tongod koddi to, ogkapulusan to Magboboot sikandin no impohondini to ngaran no Igbuyag ta,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ko og-aguantoon ta ka igkabaybayari ta kuntoon uromo ogbogayan ki to katondanan to ogbulig kandin to pog-alap to katondanan din to pandatuan. Di ko ogligalon ta sikandin, songo ogligalon ki nikandin.
No nigtabak a ki Hisus to, ‘Di Buyag, ogtuu poron su natagaan to mgo otow kai ka mgo batasan ku nokani no inlogob kud ka mgo anaranan to mgo Hudiu no impapirisu ku woy nigbarasan kud on ka mgo otow no nigtuu koykow.
di nighinggat dan sikandin to kagi ran to, “Duma ka pa kanami dio to ogdatongan noy no baloy su mahapun on no magaan on ogsalop ka allow.” No sikan ian no nigduma si Hisus kandan no nigsolod dio to nigdatongan dan.
pangasu
Ka mgo dakol no igbuyag to soini no kalibutan no nandumaruma kandin to ogmanhimu to mgo maroot no mgo batasan, ko ogkitoon dan ka obol to hapuy no ogpakasilab kandin, ogmaninsinogow woy ogpandawot.
sonson
Ka talabubung, karumaan to mgo busow. Ian ka tagbanua no og-ugpò to bubungan, balitì, dalama, sampow.
Agboti nu to og-andal ka harayu.
hibukhibuk
laglag
Duon mgo taga Biria no nigpanulud ki Pablo taman to lunsud to Atinas. No pogkouma ran on, intugun ni Pablo kandan to oyow magaan do pasundulon si Silas daruwa ki Timoteo.
No ko ogkatuman on ka allow to Magboboot no magaan din on igpohondini ka panganoy no Anak din kai to soini no kalibutan, duon dangob no kagi rin tongod to Anak din to, “Og-awoson to ogsayoon sikandin to tibo no mgo diwata no suguanon ku.”
Ian su ko duon kabogbogan to sikan no Balaod no magaan ogkasalinan ka karoyawi rin, dakoldakol pad man ka karoyawi to sikan no iam no dalan no kono ogkasalinan ka kabogbogan din.
sipod
saguysuy
No, ka batasan ni Pilatu ko Pagkoonan to Nigpahanaphanap, ogpalibuwason din ka sagboka no pinirisu no og-alamon to mgo Hudiu.
bokad
Di to waro ka mogtuu to innangon ku koykow, ogko-omaw ka taman to ogkatuman on ka malogot no kagi ku koykow.”
pananuran
Ka kayu no lawa-an, ko du-on on ogbungul no lagot to lawa-an, ko ogmakogal on, sikan on ka salong no ogkoimu on no ilaw.
lu-an
boloy
No nigpoumow to sinaligan ka mgo otow no nokoutang dio to igbuyag din su oyow og-im-imuan din sikandan. Kagi to sinaligan kuwo to an-anayan no impoumow rin to, ‘Pila ka noutang nu to igbuyag ku?’
su lalimma ka mgo hari ku no tibo lukos. Igpabohog ku sikandan,’ kagi, ‘oyow kono songo ogpokohondini to soini no ugpaan no dakol no igkabaybayari.’
Kò nu’gpatugka-a ka bolad nu; hogota’n.
Nò, natuman to kagi no ingkasulat dongan ni Isaias to kagi to Magboboot to: “Duon otow no ogbabansagon dio to holholawan. Ogkagi to, ‘Lantasi now woy gawhani now ka ogbayaan to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta oyow ogmatul-id.
Ian su ka sikan no mgo Balaod, ian do ogkasugat ka dii ro to lawa to mgo otow unawa to litos no pogkoon dan, mgo ogkoinum dan, woy ka mgo pogdigus to lawa ran. Di ka pulus to sikan no mgo sugu, ogtaman do to ogpokouma on ka igliwan to Magboboot to sikan no Balaod.
lopang
olog
dutun
Songo amboy-amboy ku na-an sikandin
Nataga a to mgo batasan now. Agad kono kow amana no mabogbog, di nigtuman now nasi ka kinagian ku woy waro now ongkori ka pogtuu now kanak. Sikan ian to ogpulasan kud on ka gumawan no ogpakasolod kow on, no kono ogkalokoban to agad hontow.
Ogbabag-od to bolad to darua no otow ko hontow ka dayagangon kandan.
No si Ananias no ian Labow no Talagpanubad dan, nigsugu to songo otow no nigsasindog to longod ni Pablo to, “Tagpia now kun ka bo–bo ni Pablo.”
Sikan ian, ko dio a to mgo Hudiu, nig-iling a to kandan no mgo batasan. Agad to kono ad on no sakup to Balaod ni Moisis di ogpaagad-agaran ku rod oyow sikandan no ogsakup dod to Balaod ni Moisis, ogkabaghotan ku oyow ogtuu on ki Hisus.
bigo-uk
Di ogsulatan ku sikoykow to soini no ig-udling ku su oyow, ko duon igkatalantan ku pad, ogkataga ka ko nokoy ka litos no batasan ta ka nohimu on no mgo anak to Magboboot. Ian su sikanta no oglimudlimud no ogsimba kandin no ian Magboboot no kono ogkamatoy, ian ta ogkounawaan ka mgo suloy woy mgo tangon no ogpakarigon to baloy su ogpakamalogot kinow to tu-tuu ian no tinuuan,
subla
no insugu noy ka sulod tanow no si Timoteo to pinohondio noy on to kaniu. Sikandin, suguanon dod to Magboboot no ogbulig kanami to ognangonnangon to Maroyow to Nangnangonon tongod ki Kristu. No pinohondio noy on si Timoteo to kaniu oyow ogmarosonon din ka pogtuu now woy oyow og-os-osonan din sikaniu
lu-ung
Pogligad to pila no allow, nig-uli si Hisus dio to Kapirnaum no nigdinog ka mgo otow to duon sikandin to baloy rin.
katu-onan no igbulung to ogkakagat to ulod. Ian oghingaranan no katu-onan su manalingboka no otow ka ogkataga to sikan no tambal.
No nig–os–osonan dan ka goinawa to mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus woy nigtalosonan dan sikandan to, “Kono now lokoi ka pogtuu now ki Hisus.” Woy nignangonnangon kandan to, “Woy kid ogpakasolod to pandatuan to Magboboot ko og–aguantoon ta pad ka mohon–ing no igkabaybayari ta.
sikuat
Di nigtabak ka amoy rin to, ‘Utu, koykow atag, kai ka ro layun to tangkaan ku, no tibo no kalaglagan ku, koykow rod no kalaglagan.
sirà
Ogbogayan ku sikandan to ogkootawan no waro katamanan. Kono ogpakaagow ka agad hontow kandan kai to koddi.
Tahan kow on no naabin to Amoy tanow no ka Magboboot su sikan ka tuud din dongan to oghimuon kow rin no maroyow dio to tangkaan din no ogligkat to oghimuon to Gimukud to Magboboot. Ian su oyow ogkohimu no ogpaagad-agad kow on ki Hisu Kristu woy ogkapasayluan on ka mgo salo now ligkat to nigpamilikpilikan kow on to langosa rin to namatoy on tongod kanta. Ogbuyu a to oyow ungod kow ogkohoy-uan woy ogkabogayan to maawang no goinawa no ligkat to Magboboot.
talangas
Ko marusilom on, diiad ka mgo hibatoon din to balutu duon to taliwaro to lanow. Ko si Hisus, sagboka rin pad dio to bubungan.
Ligkat to pogtuu ni Inuk, pig-angoy to Magboboot sikandin no warad mogbayo to kamatayon din. Nigpammitow to mgo otow sikandin di wa dan kitaa su diad on to langit. Duon ingkasulat dongan tongod ki Inuk to waro pad angaya sikandin, to narago ka Magboboot kandin.
pilis
sugsug
Di sikoddi atag, ogtokoron ku man sikandin su dio a man nigligkat no kandin ka nigsugu koddi.”
Nataga kow pa porom ka dalan no oghondio to ogdatongan ku.”
Pogkouma ran, nigbayungan dan si Hisus to kagi ran ki Pilatu to, “Ka soini no otow, nakitaan noy on sikandin no ogbangkukon din ka mgo otow oyow kono ogbayad to buhis no insugu to labow no igbuyag to dio to Ruma no si Sisar. Songo ognangonnangon sikandin to sikandin ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan no songo Labow no Igbuyag.” Ian ka kagi to mgo otow bahin ki Hisus dio ki Pilatu.
No pogkaponga rin to kagi rin, impayag din on ka bolad din woy ka paa rin.
Si Anggam, nammaraan ligkat to nighiipanow diò to mariù. Kagi rin to, “Inum a kun bag ko du-on bua woig now, Usì.”
Di niglanglangotan on ian ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod dan woy ka mgo Parisiu su nigbawian ni Hisus ka noumil to Allow ran to Oghimoloy no nigmoin-insooy ko ogmonuon dan si Hisus.
Sikan su ka anak ku, nounawa to namatoy on di kuntoon, nootawan on, woy unawa to nalagak di kuntoon nokouli do,’ kagi to amoy. Duon ian nigbunsud ka pagkoonan dan.”
Tigbal ki rò nigpinnu-u ka ogko-on no noko-uma ka magaliug no nakaruwa to nigko-on ki.
ispiun
bu-og
Ko og-ayaton ta ka batò, oglanganon ta to walis oyow ogka-anad.
bu-ang
ambutuut
To sikan dod no allow, ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus nighondio kandin no nig-inso to “Hontow no ngaran ka dakoldakol ko ogkatuman on ka Pogsugu to Magboboot kai to tano?”
Agad to ogkoiniatan dan no ogpang-anad to Balaod no inggalat dongan ni Moisis di waro dan sabuti ka ig-anad dan woy ka lagboy no igpangbaghot dan.
Ogsagda ki to bulan
Paspasilion ta ka homoy
Og-awoon din on ka tibo no igmasakit to goinawa ran su warad kamatayon, warad on igpandawot, warad on ogsinsinogow, su ogpunasan din ka tibo no mgo luwo to mgo mata ran su ka tahan no pog–ugpo to soini no kalibutan, ogkaawo on.”
Kagi ni Pedro to nig–inso to asawa ni Ananias to, “Sikan do ka salapi no imbayad to tano now?” Kagi to asawa ni Ananias, “Hoo. Sikan do ian.”
losut
Nò, ka mgo sundalu to langit, nangikinabo to malinis woy mamaputi no manggad, no nanundul kandin
kaluwagi
uyun
Ian su, ka sikan no an-anayan no sabut, kono ogpakabulig kanta. Su ko makabulig pa, kono poron og-awoson to ogliwanan to iam no sabut.
tikoba
Di ian to ogkagi koy su nigpitow ka Magboboot to goinawa noy to maroyow dio to tangkaan din no nigsaligan koy rin to ognangonnangon to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon. Sikan ian to, ka ignangon noy, kono to oyow ogsayoon koy to mgo otow, di ian to ogkagi koy oyow ogkarago ka Magboboot, su ian ian ka ogpitow kanta ko nokoy ka dio to goinawa ta.
lagobgob
bingbing
Nakataliwarò to pusung ku so-i manggad.
Ko ogtu-uron nu to ogbutung, og-inso-on nu woy ko igbogoy, ogbolion nu.
Woy inhutuk din man do inangon to sikan dod no impasulat din. No kagi rin to, “Sikandan, konad on ian ogpakasolod to himolayan ku.”
banos
tinagpò
ila
Warò ikanangon dan to duma no kinagian.
Mundù igpo-on.
iì
ko-id
Kagi ni Hisus to mgo hibatoon din to, “Duon allow uromo no ogkoiniat kow to ogpitow koddi no Kakoy to Koot-otawan, to agad sagboka no allow, di kono kow ogpakatood to ogpitow soini.
“Nigbawian din ka duma no mgo otow, di ka kandin no lawa kono din ogkabawian. Nangon din no sikandin ka Labow no Igbuyag to mgo Hudiu. Ko oglogsad sikandin duon to krus, bali pad naan no ogtuu kinow kandin.
bolad
Di kuntoon, nakakita kow woy nigdinog now ka oghimuon ni Pablo. Di ka soini no oghimuon din, kono no kai ro to Episu di marani on ogkalogob ni Pablo ka tibo no mgo lunsud to probinsia to Asia. No kuntoon, mohon–ing on ka mgo otow no nig-im–imuan din no nig-ongkoran dan on ka pogtuu ran to mgo inotow-otow. Ian su ognangonan din ka mgo otow to kono no malogot no magboboot ka og–ampuan to mgo otow no hinimu ro duon to bolad.”
Ko niglogsad sikandan, nigkita ran ka paan woy duon pigtomogan no hapuy no duon ogtuugon no ngalap.
Woy ungod din lituka ka sikan no ingkasulat no igmalogot dan to nig–awos ka pogtuman to sikan no sulat tongod to ogkabaybayaran on ka Kristu no ian Im–Imanan to mgo Koot–otawan. Woy innangon ni Pablo kandan to nig–awos dod ka pogkouyag din ligkat to kamatayon din. No kagi ni Pablo to, “Ka soini ian no Hisus no ignangon noy kaniu, ian ka Im–Imanan to Koot–otawan no oghingaranan ki Kristu.”
tolom
takarau
Nakabayo woy si Pablo dio to lunsud to Ampipulis woy ka Apulunia. Pogkalugoy, nokouma on to lunsud to Tisalunika. No dio to Tisalunika, duon anaranan to mgo Hudiu.
Ipapitow now ka salapi no igbayad now to buhis.” Nò nig-alapan dan si Hisus to songo putow no salapi.
miod
Ko nigtuu kow pa porom to kagi ni Moisis, songo ogtuu kow koddi kuntoon su nigsulatan man bahin koddi.
Di to tag sagboka kanta no nigtuu ki Hisu Kristu, duon imbogoy rin to katouanan. No sikandin ka nigboot ko songo monu ka igkabogoy rin to tag sagboka kanta.
Kono ogkitoon ka Magboboot, di si Hisus ka igpohitaga kanta ko nokoy ka Magboboot su ogkounawa lagboy si Hisus kandin. Si Hisus ka ogpakalabow to tibo to agad nokoy no kalaglagan no nohimu.
suoy
Ka tabak ni Hisus kandan, “Malogot ka soini ogkagion ku kaniu. To sikoddi no Anak to Magboboot, kona a ogpokohimu to agad nokoy. Ka ogkitoon ku rio to Amoy ku ro ka oghimuon ku; songo sikan do ka oghimuon ku.
Woy ungod noy ogsayoon ka Magboboot su namminog kow to innangonnangon noy kaniu no kagi rin, woy insabuk now on dio to taliwaro to goinawa now su nigtokoran now on to kinagian ian to Magboboot, kono no kagi ro duon to mgo otow. No ligkat to sikan no kagi rin, ogmasalig ka pogtuu now ka mgo otow no nigtuu on kandin.
sulu
gutus
Nangoni a,” kagi ni Hisus, “ko hondoi nigpuun ka katondanan ni Huan to ogbautismu to mgo otow? Og-insa a ko dio to Magboboot nigpuun ka katondanan din woy ko dini to mgo otow? Tabaka a now.”
Og-orol-orol a to baatik ku.
tuhug
Konò og-aguanta si Joaquin no oghusoy to so-ini no problima su mabogat on lagboy.
No ka igkohon-om no diwata to Magboboot, imbus-ug ka tagu to boung din dio to woig no ogkohingaranan to Eupratis. Pogkaponga, ogkootian on. Ian su oyow ogkabayaan on to mgo igbuyag no ogligkat to silaan.
Ko moon-ing ka lawo-lawò to talubagì, ogpanguiton ta to walis ka baloy to talubagì oyow ogka-awò. Ko ogkuiton nu ogkaragdag ka mgo lagut.
Sikan ian, ka otow no og-atu to otow no ogpakaalap to katondanan to pogsugu, ian dan ogkaatuan ka katondanan no imboot to Magboboot, no sikan ian to ogkalogparan on ka sikan no otow.
Niglouy si Hisus dio to lunsud to Nasarit no nigtulinan din no ugpaan woy nigsolod sikandin to baloy no anaranan to mgo og-ampu dio su sikan ka batasan din ko Allow ran to Oghimoloy woy to og-ampu. Nò, nigsasindog on si Hisus oyow ogbasa to nakasulat,
Ka tirò, sikan ka ogkoimu no asukal no mo-omis on ko ig-amut to og-inuman ta no kapi.
No impananglitan ni Hisus kandan ko nigbohog din kandan to, “Bantoy kow. Ngilam kow tongod to sikan no igpatulin to paan to mgo Parisiu mgo igpatulin to paan ni Hirodis.”
na-an
Ka goti-an no agoloy, igpako-on to iam no nig-anak oyow ogkabongkag ka langosa no nigmalibuson to diralom.
Si Hisus, warad kai su nootawan on ligkat to pogkamatoy rin. Doromdoma now ka impanoy rin inangon kaniu no dio kow rod to Galilia
lotoy
Ka usig no nigsawod to hilamunon ian si Satanas. Ka tiggaani, sikan ian ka mohuri no mgo allow kai to kalibutan. Ka mgo oggaani, sikandan ka mgo diwata no suguanon to Magboboot no ligkat dio to langit.
Nokouma on ka sika an-anayan no allow to sikan no Pagkoonan no oghingaranan to Paan no Waro Igpatulin. Sikan ian ka allow no ogpohimatayan dan ka nati to karniru no litos no ogkoonon to sikan no pagkoonan ko oglabung. Nò, nig-inso ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus kandin to, “Hondoi koy ogpanagana to iglabung ta to soin no pagkoonan?”
sarumun
Og-abat to doun ko ogdatunan to ogko-on.
Ka atolug to bakbak, warò pad nigpigsò. No du-on dò to marani ka inoy.
gangu
hop-at
nangkà
Noinuinu ka mgo hibatoon din to soin no kagi rin, di nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus to, “Mgo Sulod ku, mohirap man ian to ogsolod to Pogsugu to Magboboot.
Omunaan to waro igduwaruwa ta no ogkagi ki to, “Ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ka talagbulig kanak. Kono a ogkahallok ko ogkoomonu a to mgo otow.”
To pogkaponga no nigbautismuan si Hisus, niggakap on sikandin dio to woig. Nò, napuasan ka langit. Niglonghag no nigkita rin ka Gimukud to Magboboot no ogpokohulughulug no ogkounawa to salapati dio to kandin no oglatun.
Di ko nokouma on ka allow no imboot to Magboboot, impootow rin on ka bugtung no anak din, no kai to boi to soini no kalibutan impaanak. Nig-alam din ka boi no nasakup to sikan no Balaod ni Moisis su oyow ko dakol on ka anak din, ogkabalukas din on ka tibo no songo nasakup to sikan no Balaod oyow ogkohimu on sikandan no anak to Magboboot.
timpu
Nakakagi ka mgo otow no nigdinog to, “Otowoy. Hontow buwa naan do ka ogkapangabangan to kouyagan no waro katamanan?”
Og-akuag ka asu.
batuk
buabua
moomul ka goinawa
Sikan no otow no nasalanganan dio to libuwasan to baloy rin, awoson no konad ogsolod dio to baloy rin no og-angoy to agad nokoy.
Ogkaawo ka soin no langit woy ka soin no kalibutan, di kono ogkaawo ka kagi ku.”
sayo-sayò
Nokani, nounawa kow to mgo uripon to mgo salo. Di kuntoon, konad on. Sikan ian to ogsayoon ku ka Magboboot su ligkat to tu-tuu ian no goinawa now, nigpaagad-agad kow on to sikan no ingkaanad kaniu no tu-tuu ian tongod to Magboboot.
Kagi ni Agripa ki Pablo to, “Litos no ogtabak kad on to mgo imbabayung to mgo Hudiu koykow.” No intayowtow ni Pablo ka bolad din no nigkagi on to igtabak din to,
hinigod
Di duon mgo otow no nig–amut ki Pablo woy nigtuu on ki Hisus. Songo nigtuu on si Dionisiu no sagboka no sakup to sikan no limuranan no nighingaranan dan no Ariopago. Woy duon boi no nigtuu no ian ngaran din no si Damaris. Woy duon dod duma no songo nigtuu.
tu-on
binayu
Nigtotokap ka otow ko’gkamot.
Ko og-ampu a to Magboboot, ungod ku ogsayoon sikandin tongod koykow,
Ian su ka koddi no lawa ka malogot no koonon woy koddi no langosa ka malogot no inumon.
Nò, mohon-ing so mgo Hudiu no ogpanumbaloy dio ki Maria, ko nigkita ran ka pighimu ni Hisus, nigtuu on ki Hisus sikandan.
Ka Gimukud to Magboboot ka ogbogoy to sagboka no otow to kabogbogan to oyow ogpakanangon sikandin ko nokoy ka impasabut din kandin. No ka dangob, ogbogayan to oyow ogpakanangon to impohitaga rin kandin.
Di ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad, nigkagian dan ka mgo otow oyow ogbuyuon dan dio ki Pilatu to si Barabas ian ka ogpalibuwason din.
Nò, ka soini no waro pulus no suguanon idogpak now sikandin dio to libuwasan to karusiloman. Ogngangang sikandin woy ogkikigot ka ngipon din.’
tigpok
su ogkamolu doka mgo kalaglagan now no insabuksabuk now. No ka manggad now, ogpangotkoton do to mgo ulod-ulod.
dinompasan
Kagi to mgo hibatoon ni Hisus, “Maistru, darua ka moirob ta.” Kagi ni Hisus, “Litos do ian.”
lubi
Tulud nu ka gakit.
“Pila no malison no paan ka duon?” ka inso ni Hisus. Nigtabak to, “Papitu no malison no paan woy duon manalingboka no doisok bag no ngalap to woig.”
kopkop
posikposik
doson
dagit
Ka ku kow kaniu su ogkoiling to boni no igpamula ta. No ko ogtubu on, ogkoongkoran woy ogkamolu on ka tahan no lawa rin.
lolong
batok
maganangon
Kagi ni Hisus, “Bantoy kow oyow kono kow ogkagawayan su mohon-ing ka mgo otow no oghingaran to ngaran ku no ognangonnangon kaniu to, ‘Koddi ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan,’ woy ogkagi ran to, ‘Magaan ogdatong ka mohuri no allow ta kai to soin no kalibutan,’ di kono kow og-unug kandan su ubat do duon,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ungod a ogkarago su natagaan kud to duon dod allow no ogpakalibuwas a to soini no pirisuan su ligkat to pog-ampu now kanak woy su ligkat to ogbuligan ad to Gimukud to Magboboot no ogligkat ki Hisu Kristu.
Waro atag mog-uyun sikandin to tuud woy to mgo hinimuan to duma no mgo igbuyag to mgo taga Hudia no nigpohimatoy ki Hisus. No ka goinawa rin, ungod din im-imani ko kon-u ogkatuman ka Pogsugu to Magboboot kai to tano.
Ian su si Silas, si Timoteo woy sikanak, ian noy innangonnangon kaniu tongod ki Hisu Kristu, to sikandin ka Anak to Magboboot. No si Hisus, kono oghalinhalin ka ignangon din.
pulutan
Sikan ian, Tiopilu no ogtahuron ka to mgo otow, to songo nakaroromdom a to ogsulat koykow to soini no nangnangonon bahin to hinimuan ni Hisus no og-ay-ayaran ku to ogsulat to oyow ogkatapid ka nangnangonon. No ian maroyow ku ko koddi ka songo ogsulat su ligkat to nalugoy on, nig-ay-ayaran ku pitawa ka tibo no mgo sinulat bahin to sikan no mgo nangnangonon. Ka tuud ian oyow ogkatagaan nud on ka malogot no nangnangonon bahin ki Hisus.
No oghondio porom woy si Pablo to probinsia to Asia oyow ognangnangonan dan porom ka mgo taga Asia to kinagian to Magboboot, di waro ibogoy to Gimukud din. Sikan ian to dio nigbayo to mgo probinsia to Pirigia woy ka probinsia to Galasia.
Nakasangkag ka. Ko warò ka pà nakapinu-u, diò ka poron to so-og nakasangkag
Songo allow, nig-ampu si Hisus no nigkagi to, “Amoy ku no Magboboot to langit woy to tano, ogpasalamat a koykow su impapitow nud dio to mgo otow no waro katouanan ka koykow no inkoholos dongan to duon natouanan no mgo otow.
sugkud
Nò, nigdalapak si Hisus kandan woy nigdampo din sikandan no kagi rin to, “Sasindog kow. Kono kow ogkahallok.”
Nighoo si Hisus. Nò, nanlibuwas ka mgo busow to lawa to sikan no otow woy nigsolod on to goinawa to sikan no mgo babuy. Duon buwa ka darua no libu no babuy no natibo, nigmamallaguy no nakatinugpu dio to lanow no nalonod on ka tibo.
No ko duon ogbuyuon ta to Magboboot, woy nataga ki to ogkaayun on to goinawa rin, songo nataga ki woy kono ki ogduwaruwa no ogpamminogan kid nikandin.
Allow-allow nig-anad si Hisus dio to Dakol no Ampuanan to mgo Hudiu, di ko marusilom, og-awo sikandin no dio nig-ugpo to bubungan no oghingaranan to Olibu.
Kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandin, “Nigtuu kad on koddi su tongod to pigkitaan a nud. Di ogkapulusan ka sikan no otow no nigtuu no agad waro nigkita koddi.”
kamanga
hapuy
bulan
abaka
Nigtabak ka mgo otow woy nigbabansagon. Kagi ran, “Ipalansang nu dio to ampow to krus oyow ogkamatoy.”
tokow
basung
Agad to og-ugpo kinow kai to soini no kalibutan, di ka ig-atu noy to mgo maroot, kono ogligkat to doromdom do duon to mgo otow no kai to soini no kalibutan.
Sikan ian to ogpakanokalnokal a to oghimuon ku su oyow ogkatuman kud on uromo ka tibo no igpohimu to Magboboot kanak su oyow uromo ogpokoutol a to igkasayo din kanak su sikan ian ka tuud din ko nigsakup kinow on nikandin ligkat to nasagboka kinow on ki Hisu Kristu.
Pa-alang-alang ogpurut to ayam ku no warò din ilibong kanak.
Nò, ka sikan no mgo otow no nokohun-a no nigdinog to sikan no Maroyow no Nangnangonon to Magboboot, waro makasolod to himolayan din su waro nigtuu. No sikan ian to duon on duma no mgo otow no ogpakasoip no ogliwan kandan. No ian on ogkabogayan to Magboboot to ogsolod to himolayan din.
Songo lian na-an dò ko kapulù
Dokad di, nighondini on si Kristu ka nohimu on no Labow to mgo Talagpanubad. No sikandin ka ogbogoy kanta to mgo karoyawan no ogligkat to sikan no iam no dalan no nohimu rin. Sikandin ka nakasolod on to sikan no ampuanan no dio to Langit no ian madmaroyow woy mamabogbog to sikan no ampuanan to mgo Hudiu. Ian su ka dio to Langit, waro himua to mgo otow, woy songo waro nigligkat kai to soini no kalibutan.
Igsabi nu to amoy nu si Amò.
Nò, ogpakamalogot a to dakol ka nohimu ni Ipaparas to oyow ogkabuligan din sikaniu woy to oyow ogkabuligan din ka mgo otow no nigtuu no dio to mgo lunsud to Laodisia woy ka dio to lunsud to Hirapulis.
Nò, ligkat to kagi now, malogot on ian no pinanganak kow to mgo otow dongan no nighimatoy to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot su ka hinimuan now kuntoon songo sikan dod ka hinimuan dan to mgo otow dongan.
Og-anak sikandin to lukos no hingarani nu sikandin ki Hisus su sikandin ka ogpakapangabang to mgo koot-otawan to mgo salo dan.”
Kagi to mgo otow ki Elisabit to, “Waro man sulod nu no oghingaranan ki Huan.”
Di ka mgo Hudiu no waro nigtuu ki Hisus, nigsasow ran ka mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no waro pad mogtuu. Sikan ian to naakoban on ka pogdoromdom dan woy nigmaroot on ka pogpitow ran to sikan no mgo otow no nigtuu on ki Hisus.
Mgo sulod, doromdoma now ka soini no pananglitan. Ka otow no ogpamula to malintok do, songo malintok do ka ogkagaani rin. Di ka sikan no otow no ogpamula atag to dakol, songo dakol dod ka ogkagaani rin.
Agad nigbayo dio ka mgo talag-anad to Balaod no mgo Parisiu sikandan no nigkita ran si Hisus to songo ogkokoon to soi mgo sinawoy, mgo talagkubla to buhis. Nig-inso dan ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus to, “Manio naan to og-amut no ogkoon si Hisus to mgo sinawoy mgo talagkubla to buhis?”
kawò
ubat
Nò, nokouma dio ki Simon Pedro to oghugas to kandin no paa. Nig-inso ni Pedro ki Hisus, “Buyag, oghugasan nu buwa ka koddi no paa?”
Ig-ulat ka anak to ibiron
Nò, ogkounawa ian. Songo ogkatagaan now no tibbal do no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot pinabayo to hinimuan dan.”
Di ka otow no waro goinawa rin to duma rin, dio do ian ogpokougpo to marusilom su maroot ka mgo hinimuan din. No ogkounawa sikandin to nabutud no kono ogkataga ko hondoi ogdolog.
Di og-awoson now to og-ay-ayaran ka tibo no oghimuon now ko oglimudlimud kow to og-ampu oyow maroyow woy oyow ogkatapid on.
lupunglupung
Pasubsubaloy ki.
ki2
No nigparani ni Hisus dio to longod din ka tibo no hibatoon din no kagi rin, “Nataga kow to batasan to mgo igbuyag kai to ampow to tano to mgo otawa no kono no Hudiu. Ko sikandan, ogdo-doogon dan ka mgo otow ran. Ka mgo igbuyag dan, ungoron dan ogsugua ka sakup dan.
gomawan
Kagi ni Pilatu kandan to, “Inhatod now ka soini lukos dii to koddi woy innangon now koddi to ogsamukon din ka mgo otow, di to nig-insaan ku sikandin kai to tangkaan now, waro ian nakitaan ku no salo din. Waro ian nakitaan ku to agad nokoy no imbayung now kandin.
Sikan ian to nigsugu ku si Timoteo dio to kaniu oyow ogkounugan now ka batasan ku. Si Timoteo ka ogkasaligan ku woy indakoli ku to goinawa woy anak ku to pogtuu ta to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. Sikandin ka ogparoromdom kaniu to batasan ku woy ka pog-ugpo ku no oglitos to oghimuon ta ko nigtuu kid on ki Hisu Kristu. Ogkounawa rod ka ig-anad ku dio to agad hondoi no ogpakalimudlimud ka mgo otow to og-ampu ki Hisus.
Sikan ian to waro oghimuon noy to agad nokoy no ogpakasaligkat to dalan to pogtuu to agad hontow su oyow kono ogkaroisok ka oghimuon noy ki Hisus.
Nò, maroyow to tibo no mgo otow ka kagi to mgo suguanon ni Hisus. No nig–alam dan si Istiban. Dakol ka pogsalig din ki Hisus woy lagboy din ogpaboot to Gimukud to Magboboot. Woy naalam dan si Pilipi, si Prokuru, si Nikanur, si Timun, si Parminas woy si Nikulas no taga Antiokia. Si Nikulas, kono no Hudiu di to waro pad nigtuu ki Hisus, tahan on no nighalin to tinuuan to mgo Hudiu.
Nigtabak si Hisus no nig-inso to, “Pila buwa no malison no paan kai kuntoon? Insoi now pad ka mgo otow.” Ko niglibong dio ki Hisus, nignangonan dan to duon lalima no malison no paan woy darua no no malison no ngalap to woig no nalutu on.
tungop
Kagi ni Pedro ki Hisus to, “Buyag, og-inso a koykow to soini no pananglitan nu, ko kanami ro no hibatoon nu ka ognangonan nu woy ko tibo no mgo otow ka ognangonan nu?”
sagkow
Di ko nigtokod dan on, niglibong dio to Hirusalim woy nignangonan dan ka duma no mgo sakup din di waro tuui kandan.
Ka ogbobonnal, du-on songo otow no ogkagi no ogmohushusayoy on.
gotas
Nigtabak si Pilatu to, “Bak Hudiu a! Ka duma nu no mgo Hudiu woy ka mgo igbuyag to talagpanubad now ka nighatod koykow kai to koddi no gobirnador. Nokoy man ka salo nu?”
Konò nu pokogdongkiga ka basu.
Ogtatamong si Buntit ki Likanay.
Igsaliu to babuy so-ikan.
Nò, ko og-alukuy pad si Hisus to sikan no boi, nanlibong on ka mgo hibatoon din. Nabolongbolong ko nigkita ran to og-alkuyan din ka boi. Di wa dan mokoinso to boi ko nokoy ka ogkuon din. Agad waro mokoinso ki Hisus to manio to ogkagian din ka boi.
saad
bongkag
Woy ogbuyu a to Magboboot to oyow ungod kow ogkohoy-uan to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu.
bubung
kolut
Nigtabak sikandan no nigkagi to, “Dio to lunsud to Bitlihim to probinsia to Hudia. Natagaan noy soini su duon ingkasulat dio to kinagian to Magboboot pinabayo to talagnangon din dongan no nigkagi to,
Nò, nighimu ni Hisus ka lubid no lalamposoy no sikan ian ka indogil din to mgo baka, mgo karniru dio to libuwasan. Agad nigbalintuad din ka mgo lamisaan to mgo ogsalsaliu to salapi no nakasawod on ka salapi dan.
tigbal dò
Sikan ian, woy ro ogkapurut to mgo otow ka sikan no innangon to Magboboot ko ogtuu on oyow ian do ogligkatan to ogbogayan sikandan su ligkat do to pogkohoy-u to Magboboot. Lagkos, songo og-awoson to, ka tibo no mgo otow no nohimu on no pinanganak ni Abraham ligkat to nig-unawa ka pogtuu ran, songo ogkabogayan to sikan no innangon to Magboboot. Kono no ka mgo Hudiu ro no nigtuman poron to Balaod to Magboboot ka ogkabogayan. Ian su nohimu on si Abraham no kaap-apuan to tibo no mgo otow no nigtuu.
Ka luiton to atolug, lagkos to kalusaput, sikan ka kolungon.
palas
no ogkasagboka a ro kandin. No kuntoon, nataga a to, ka ogpakamaroyow kanak dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, kono ogligkat to pogpaagad-agad ku to mgo Balaod ni Moisis di nigligkat atag to Magboboot su nigligkat to nigtuu ad on ki Kristu su ka pogtuu ta kandin, ian ka ogpakamaroyow kanta dio to tangkaan din.
Ogpakasundul koddi ka soin no lukos. Di kono no litos ka koddi no katondanan agad to oghokad to kandin no sandals.”
busung
Ka sikan no anit, logpad kun to Magbobo-ot to og-ian-ian to mgo ulod-ulod su ka mgo ulod-ulod, konò og-ulingol to mgo otow.
Di ko nigmarani on ki Hisus, nigkita ran to namatoy on. Nò wa dan on atag pantigi ka lison din.
Ka sikan no innangon ku, kono to oyow ogpasayo a to mgo otow su ian goinawa ku ko ogkasayo a to Magboboot. Woy songo kono ogkohimu no ka igkarago to mgo otow ka ogkoiniatan ku. Ian su ko sikan pa ian, kono a poron ogkohimu no suguanon ni Kristu.
doson
kayamoy
bohow
nugun
sulat
Ogtuang a su wà bo-ung
hamatuk
Nig-agow ka ba-ad no tanò ku. Nigpasalangan to warò a.
gos-ang
Nò, su nabogayan kinow to iam no pogkouyag ta, og-awoson no oghagtongan ta ka agad nokoy no lunsura no maroot no batasan. Kono kid on og-uubat. Woy og-awoson to kono no malibu-libu ka poghimu ta. Kono ta ogkoimaan ka mgo kalaglagan to duma ta woy kono kid on ogdoot to duma no otow.
Ko ogwo-ilwo-il ka lawa to alibutod, songo og-alibood.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ka otow no kono ogduma koddi, sikan ka og-atu koddi. Ka otow no kono ogbulig koddi to oglimud to mgo otow, ogpasuwayon din ka mgo otow.”
Di ka sikan no asawa no waro nigtuu, ko ogkoiniat to og-awo on, balagara nud on su ko ogkoiling to sikan, ka otow no ogtuu, kono din og-awoson to oghawid to asawa rin no waro nigtuu. Ian su sikanta no nigtuu on, ogkoiniatan to Magboboot to ogmaawang do ka pog-ugpo ta.
ooy
Ko waro mootawi sikandin, songo waro poron pulus ka ignangonnangon noy woy songo waro pulus to pogtuu now.
Sikan no tuid, pila buwa ka napirisu no nighimatayan dan ka mgo otow to pog-atu ran to gobirnu no si Barabas ka ngaran to sagboka no napirisu.
Ka otow no nanumbaloy dio to songo ugpa-an, wa do nigbuoy no nig-uli on. Ko tatolu no allow rin to ogpanumbaloy no niglibong on.
Ogluwanon noy diò to dibabò.
sikut
kopkop
Nò, mgo sulod, soini naan do ka ignangon ku kaniu. Hogoti now ka pogtuu now to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta woy dakola now ka pogsalig now to dakol no kabogbogan din.
ig-orok, unawa to agoloy, homoy, balatung, ulibon, sikan ka igko-orok su ogpan-ulugon ta ka ig-orok
Waro pulus ko natuli ki woy ko waro. Ian do duon dakol no pulus ta, ko duon on ka iam no pogkouyag ta no nigligkat to Magboboot.
Nalimud on ka gout ni Inò no igbakul din asolom to kamot din.
“Magboboot, kuntoon, kono ogmasakit so goinawa ku ko ogkamatoy a su natuman on ka innangon nu koddi
“Manio to kono kow ogbobo-ot ko nokoy ka maroyow no oghimuon now?
lamoy
Kono nu ogpinpinnu-ui ka agology no songo saku su ogkabusbus.
Di nigtabak ka anak din no kakoy kuwo to amoy rin to, ‘Dokad naan sikoddi no matolon kai to baloy nu no waro a mogligal to agad nokoy ka insugu nu koddi di waro a nu bogayi to agad nati to kambing oyow oghimu a to pagkoonan to mgo duma ku!
tagù
Nò, sikan ian no nighingaranan dan ka sika tano to Tano to Langosa taman to kuntoon.
pamalay
Ko nigbalig ni Hisus ka sikan no woig no nohimu to inumanon dio to lunsud to Kana no sakup to Galilia, sikan ian ka an-anayan no igkabolongbolong no pighimu rin. Nigpapitow on si Hisus to kabogbogan din. Nò, nohogot on ka pogtuu to mgo hibatoon din kandin.
Tilu-a nu su’gkimul. Ko konò ogkatilù ka duma no hilamonon, ogmallayat.
Malogot ian ka kagi ku kaniu to duon mgo otow kai kuntoon no kono pad ogkamatoy taman to ogkakitaan dan on ka Pogsugu to Magboboot.”
Mohon-ing ka nigkagi to, “Nigsoloran to busow ka soini. Nalangog on sikandin. Manio to ogpamminog ki kandin?”
lagsob
naponù ka goinawa
lobas
Konad on ogmarusilom dio woy konad on og-awoson ka mgo ilawan woy ko ka layag to allow. Ian su ka Magboboot no ian Lagboy no Igbuyag dan, ian on ka ogpakabat-ow kandan. No ogbogayan sikandan to katondanan to ogbulig to pog-alap to Magboboot to pandatuan din taman to waro katamanan.
Kanokal ka to oghusud to gabas oyow ogka-anad ka oyow du-on ogkato-uan nu to oggabas.
Agad sikaniu no mgo taga Kapirnaum, nahan now buwa to sikaniu no lunsud ka labowlabow di igdogpak kow atag dio to imperno. Ko ka mgo kabolbolonganan no inhimu kud dio to mgo lunsud now, ko nighimu kud pad porom dongan dio to lunsud to taga Tiru woy taga Suduma, nig-ongkoran dan porom ka maroot no mgo batasan dan no wa porom logpari to Magboboot ka lunsud dan woy duon pad porom sikandan kuntoon.
Impatokod kud sikandan bahin koykow woy ogparagason ku pad to oghimu oyow ogkoilingan dan to koykow no goinawa dio to duma ran woy oyow songo og-ugpo a dio to kandan no goinawa.”
dapayun
No uromo, ogpalibongon to Magboboot si Hisus kai to kaniu no ian ka Im–imanan to mgo Koot–otawan no oghingaranan ki Kristu.
sipo-unon
Nigparagas no oghipanow woy si Hisus no nokouma dio to Hirusalim no nighondio to Dakol no Ampuanan. Pogdatong din dio, nigdogil din ka tibo no mgo talagbaligya tagkos to mgo ogboli. Nigbalintuad din on ka mgo lamisaan to mgo ogsaliu to salapi woy ka pinnuuanan to mgo ogbaligya to salapati, nabalintuad din.
Tahura nu ka amoy nu woy ka inoy nu, woy unawaa nu ka goinawa nu to mgo duma nu to goinawa nu to koykow no lawa.”
akob
An-anayan,” kagi rin, “wara a mataga ko hontow no otow sikandin. Di ka koddi no tuud ian to ogpabautismu to woig oyow ogpatokoron ku sikandin to mgo taga Israil.”
Og-awoson no oghimuon ta ka batasan no oglitos to mgo otow no og-ugpo to kaawangan. Kono ki og-amut to mgo igkarago to mgo otow no oglimudlimud no ogman-inum-inum woy ka ogkalasinglasing. Woy kono ki oghimu to maroot. Kono ki oghilabot to otow no kono no asawa ta. Kono ki ogpoog-ogotoy, woy kono ki ogkoima to agad nokoy.
Ka igpulag, sikan ka igpo-obol no ogkarogil ka patiukan
Ka alamara dongan, maro-ot su ogpanhimatoy to warò salò. Di ka kunto-on no alamara, noimu on no kaponongan to maroyow no alamara su ogbuligan on to mgo sundalu.
sin-okon
bokas
No nignangonan ni Hisus ka mgo otow to soini no pananglitan. Kagi rin to, “Duon otow no nigpamula to kayu no oghingaranan to igira dio to kamot din. To nigtulin on ka kayu malasi oglouya to tagtuun su ogpitawon din ko duon on bogas, di waro.
Sangì ki oghipanow.
bongkug
su-an
pigok
kongkong
Di ka mgo hibatoon din diad on to taliwaro to dakol no lanow. Noirapan sikandan to mamogsoy su dakol ka luwak woy masungalngal ka balutu to kalamag.
buyu
Nò, su nigtuu ad on ki Kristu, ogkounawa to nakalagkos a kandin no pogkamatoy rin ko niglansang dio to krus. No kuntoon, konad on no sikanak ka ogboot to pog-ugpo ku di ogkoiam on ka pogkootow ku su kaid on si Kristu to goinawa ku. Di ka soini no pog-alap ku to pog-ugpo ku kai to tano, ogligkat to pogsalig ku kandin no ian Anak to Magboboot ka duon dakol no goinawa rin kanak no nigpakimatoy kanak.
kobkob
Nataga kow man poron to sikanta no nigtuu ki Hisus, ian ka impananglitan to sikan no Baloy to Magboboot woy nataga kow rod poron to og-ugpo ka Gimukud din kai to kanta.
to-on
Kagi to mgo sundalu, “To pogkouma noy dio to pirisuan, nalokoban on man woy duon ka mgo talagbantoy to pirisuan no nansasindog duon to marani to lokob. Di to pogpuwas noy, waro man otow dio to solod.”
Ka tikoba, nakutkutan diò to diralom no natobal on to woig.
Dongan, ko wa pad nohimu ka kalibutan, sikandin no oghingaranan to Kagi, tahan no duon dio to langit. Sikandin ka duma to Magboboot woy Magboboot ian sikandin.
tirù
lagandang
towkow
Nò, nasisinikot si Simon Pedro no nighulabut din ka moirob din no nigsilap ka kawanan no talinga to suguonon to sikan no Labow to mgo talagpanabud. Si Malku ka ngaran to sikan no suguonon.
Woy nigtabak si Hisus to, “Umba naan no ogpokogdongan koy no oghalit to paan dio to boung, sikandin ian ka ogpanabod koddi.
Ogtuhugon ta ka baliog.
Duon mgo otow no nigbuyu ki Pablo oyow og–ugpo pad porom dio to kandan, di waro moghoo sikandin.
Sikan ian to pig–iniugan on to Magboboot sikandan no pinogbalagad on ko nokoy ka ogtubaran dan no layag dio to langit.” Kagi ni Istiban, “No ka sikan, nounawa rod to sikan no ingkasulat to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot dongan to, ‘Sikaniu no pinanganak ni Israil, to sikan no kohop–atan no tuid now no nokohihipanow kow dio to holholawan, og–inso a kaniu ko sikanak ka nigtubaran to sikan no mgo ayam no nanhimatayan now?
hikot
Pogpitow rin no nataguan on ka sikan no manggad to agad nokoy no mgo ayam, mgo magintalunan, woy mgo ulod–ulod no ogdul–ug woy ka mgo manukmanuk.
Niggisi to Labow to mgo talagpanubad ka kinabo din. Kagi rin, “Manio to ogtatagad ki to dangob no ogtitigus? Wa ta og-awosi to ogpakatimul pad ka titigus kandin.”
Di kagi ni Hisus kuwo to mgo Sadusiu to, “Ka mgo lukos mgo boi kuntoon no kai pad to tano, ogmaas-asawooy pad.
Sikan to ian no nigkagi ni Moisis to, ‘Duon uromo talagnangon to kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no Magboboot no ipohondio din to kaniu no ogkounawa kanak. Pamminog kow kandin ko nokoy ka ignangon din kaniu.
ogot
Nò to pog-awo ku to sikan no ugpaan to Hudia, nighondio a to mgo lunsud to sikan no mgo ugpaan to Siria woy ka Silisia, no dio a nig-anad.
sa
Dio to bukod din, duon ngaran no ingkasulat no ingkoholos ka kalitukan din. Soini ka ingkasulat to: “Babilunia no ian mabantug no lunsud woy inoy to tibo no ogmanhimu to agad nokoy no maroot no batasan kai to kalibutan no ogpakasipod.”
Nò, nig-iloban to duma no mgo konsial ka langlanguwan ni Hisus woy nigsusuntuk dan sikandin. Songo nigtagpian sikandin to duma no kagi ran to,
Nahan ku ko duon dakol no salo ni Pablo. Di to pogpamminog ku to igbayung dan kandin, waro man salo din.
libulung
Ka uran natagngo-op koy.
Ogkasumpa ka kibol ko du-on bailan.
Ka ogko-opos no otow, malopot so doromdom din no maga-an ogka-aras woy ogkabolù.
“Ka Pogsugu to Magboboot, songo ogkounawa to soini. Duon ka songo talagboli to maroyow ro no perlas no ogpamitow ko duon ogbaligya to soini.
No, nigpaap-apuloy ka duma no sakup ni Huan woy ka sagboka no Hudiu bahin to batasan to tinuuan to mgo Hudiu to ogpanhugas.
Nigsakoy koy man do ligkat to Mitilini, no pogkapawo, nakaligad koy ro to pulu to Kiu. Mapawo, nigsagpit koy dio to pulu to Samu. Pogkapawo man do no nokouma koy on dio to lunsud to Militu.
Ko maroyow ka pogsugba to ngalap, mo-omis ta to ogko-on su mananam ka ngalap
olat
Ka amonggoy, sikan dod ka ig-umow to amoy. Igpasayò no ngaran
lugib
Di sikandan no mgo Hudiu, nounawa to naatangan dod ka pogkasabuti ran. Agad kuntoon, ko ogbasoon dan ka tahan no insabut to Magboboot, ogkounawa to naatangan pad ka pogdoromdom dan. Ian su si Hisu Kristu ro ka ogpakaawo to sikan no igkaatang to pogkasabuti ran.
agasan
Ka Imbabasuk ka nahan to mgo otow no ogpakabogoy to dakol no ogkaga-ani. Ian ogpamulingan.
Kagi to balu, “Og-abalangon ku ka baloy no nighimu ni Jeremy di warò pad igkabayad ku.”
Woy og-inso a ko warad on pulus now ka tibo no inhimu to Gimukud to Magboboot kaniu? Di duon poron pulus now.
pusod
Hondo-i ka no-otow?
Nigkagi man do si Hisus to, “Nokoy buwa ka ogpounawaan ku to kuntoon no mgo otow? Sikaniu no mgo otow kuntoon, ogkoilingan kow ro to mgo bato no ogmaminpinnuu no ogmaliliagoy dio to palingki. Ogpangumow sikandan to mgo duma ran no mgo bato no nigkagi to,
maragulus
galugu
Ka otow no oggulay to taro plant, ogkagud to niug no iggatà din.
bakotin
sop-ang
panagana
Koko-uyun so bakalawan.
nanò
Konò iglituk to kulang ka goinawa, igtu-on to ogmasakit lagboy ka goinawa to songo otow.
sundug
Noinuinu lagboy ka mgo hibatoon din no nigmoin-insooy ko hontow buwa naan do ka ogpakakuo to kouyagan no waro katamanan?
To diad woy si Hisus to dalan, nakatagbu sikandan to otow no ngaran din si Simon no matig Sirini. Nigpogos to mgo sundalu sikandin to ogpatiangon to krus ni Hisus.
nanoy
bayò
Nò, ka Magboboot ka nighimu to tibo woy ian to nohimu su oyow ogkasayo sikandin. No nigboboot ka Magboboot to oyow ogkoumaan on si Hisus to igkabaybayari rin. Litos ka sikan oyow ogpakatuman sikandin to tibo no tuud to Magboboot. No ian su oyow si Hisus ka ogpakaalap to tibo kanta no ogkapangabangan on. Sikan ka nighimu to Magboboot oyow ogmohon-ingon din ka mgo anak din no og-alapon din dio to kandin no karoyawan.
alukaloy
tabun
silò
Ko ogbabalun ki diò to pantad, ogsabukan to bayokbok oyow ogkasalà ka mgo lagut
dugsù
Ogduluson ki to babuy no ogkannugunan to anak din.
Ka lunga, oglusukon on to ogdagdag su nambotu on ka bogas.
Di oyow kono ki ogkasasawan to soini no mgo talagkubla to buhis, hondio ka to lanow no ogpamunnit ka. Dio to bo-bo to an-anayan no ngalap no ogkoutol nu, ogkitoon nu ka songo salapi no litos to igbayad to buhis tanow. Alapa nu woy igbogoy nu to mgo talagkubla to buhis to Dakol no Ampuanan.”
Ko kono kow ogkasaligan to kalaglagan no igpatamongan kaniu to songo otow kai to tano, hontow buwa ka ogsalig kaniu to ogtamong to kaniu no kalaglagan?”
Sikaniu no mgo anak ku to pogtuu, nigsulatan ku sikaniu to soini oyow kono kow ogpakasalo. Di ko duon otow no ogpakasalo, duon ogbulig kanta dio to Magboboot no ian si Hisu Kristu no matuwarong lagboy.
Natatoluan on ka pogdatong ni Pistu dio to Sisaria no nighondio sikandin to lunsud to Hirusalim.
sugpang to gapas
“Duon bato no lukos kai no nig-alap din ka lalimma no malison no paan woy darua no molintok no ngalap to woig no nalutu on. Di kono do buwa ogkalogob ka tibo soini no mgo otow.”
Ko waro kow pad nigtuu, dakol dod so goinawa ran kaniu to songo wa kow nigtuu su unawa kow kandan. Di nig-alam kud on sikaniu no kono kow on no unawa kandan su nigtuu kow on man. Sikan ian no nasundug kow to mgo waro nigtuu.
Ko og-awoson to ogsayo-sayo a, ian ku ro igkarago ka igkabaybayari ku su ligkat to sikan, ogkataga kow to ligkat do kanak, ogkaalang-alang a to katouanan ku.
Pitow kow to bolad ku mgo paa ku oyow ogtokoron now to sikoddi ian. Samsama now ka lawa ku no nataga kow to koddi ian su ko gimukud, waro man atag sapu woy bokog no unawa to koddi.”
Ian su ogkabigtawan porom ka goinawa ran to insugu din. Kagi rin, “Agad ko duon ayam no ogpakariok to soini no bubungan, ogdogpakon to batu taman to ogkamatoy.”
kali
tagpì
Waro pulus kandan to ogsimba koddi su ognangon dan to mgo sugu ku ian ka ig-anad dan, di atag ka kandan do no mgo sugu ka in-anad dan to mgo otow.’ ”
libat
woy ka ogpanlibug, woy ka ogmool-olinoy, woy ka ogmandakop, woy ka mgo ubaton, woy ka mgo otow no nangon to kono no ogmalogot, woy ka agad hontow no oghimu to agad nokoy no kono ogkaayun to tu-tuu ian no tinuuan.
Duon ogkoiniatan ta di kono ki ogpokoutol. Ligkat to sikan, duon oghimatayan ta oyow ogpokoutol ki poron to sikan no igkoiniat ta. Woy songo kuwo ko duon og-abinon ta poron di kono ki rod ogpokoutol. No ogmo-og-ogotoy kid woy ogmamasamuk kid on. Di kono kid ogpokoutol to igkoiniat ta su waro ki mogbuyu to Magboboot.
li-on
Sikan ian no ogpabarasan ku ro sikandin no pogkaponga to pogbaras, ogpalibuwason ku ro sikandin.”
Ogkapolodpolod pad ka pogtakang din no ogdalapak to inoy rin.
Pogpitow ku man do to Nati no Karniru, no nigloko din on ka sikan no igkohop-at no imparokot to sikan no ogbasoon. No nigdinog ku ka igkohop-at to sikan no hinimu no duon goinawa no nigkagi to, “Hondini kad on.”
“Pamminogi now man do ka dangob no pananglitan,” kagi ni Hisus. “Duon otow no nigpamulaan din ka tano din to songo lunsud no bunal no ogbogas no oghingaranan to ubas. Songo niglingutan din to alad ka tibo no pinamula rin woy nigtoungan din ka dakol no batu no litos no taguanan to ubas ko ogdiokan dan ka sikan no bogas to ubas. Pogkaponga, nigpohimu rin ka matikang no pinayag no nohimu to batu no unturanan to ogbantoy to sika pinamula rin. Nò, nigpasambayan din on to mgo otow ka pinamula rin woy nighipanow sikandin dio to mariu no ugpaan.
Hipongoi nu ka baloy
Og-abat ki to mangulod no agoloy su ogtibungulon ta su maroyow no ogko-onon.
Nigparagas si Hisus no nig-inso, “Hontow kaniu ka waro buwa makabasa to impasulat to Magboboot? Waro buwa!” Soini ka kagi to impasulat din “Ka batu no nig-ongkoran to mgo talaghimu to baloy su nahan dan no waro pulus, sikan ka nohimu nasi no marigon lagboy no batu no igpounturan to baloy.
Noinuinu ka inoy mgo amoy to bato di nigsugu ni Hisus kandan to, “kono kow ognangonnangon to agad hontow otawa to soini ka nighimu ku.”
Nò, tongod to mgo otow no ogtahud to Magboboot, ogkatou ka Magboboot no ogpangabang kandan to mgo igkabaybayari ran. Di tongod to mgo otow no ogpanhimu to maroot, ogkatou sikandin no og-indan kandan taman to ogpokouma on ka allow no oglogparan din on sikandan.
habit
Nò, nabolu lagboy ka mgo Hudiu. Nò, nigmamurut kandan ka mgo batu no ogdogpakon dan porom si Hisus. Di si Hisus, niglonus on no nig-ongkod dio to Dakol no Ampuanan.
No duon ka sika suguanon dio to holholawan no ogbabansagon. Kagi rin, ‘Lantasi now woy gawhani now ka ogbayaan to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta oyow ogkatul-id.’ ”
To nakarinog ka mgo Parisiu to inkagi to mgo otow nigkagi sikandan to, “Omunaan no nokohimu sikandin to unawa to sikan su nabogayan sikandin to igbuyag to mgo busow no si Satanas to kabogbogan.”
Ko nigkagikagi pad si Hisus, nigdatong ka mgo lukos puun to baloy ni Hairu no nignangon ki Hairu, “Namatoy on ka anak nu. Manio naan to ogsasawon nu pad ka Maistru?”
“Waro lunsura to Magboboot ka kono no Hudiu su nigmaroyow rin on ka goinawa ran su ligkat to pogtuu ran ki Hisus.
Ka otow no manokal no wa do nigbuoy no nakaponga on to kamot din.
Ko hondo-i ogkataman ka hikot to asu, du-on do ogbungku.
Nigtabak din to, “Malogot man ian to oghun-a si Ilias oyow ogpanagana to dalan to sika Im-imanan now. Di og-insa a kaniu,” kagi, “Manio naan to duon ka inkasulat to Tahan no Kasulatan ta to koddi no Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan, ogkabaybayaran a woy kona a ogtinawoon to mgo otow?”
Ko og-abat ki to bulu, og-araban ta su oghimuon ta no sinombung.
galat
Ka otow no ogkakamot to tu-id din no homoy di konò ogpoko-uma to ogga-ani to homoy rin su namatoy on, ogkabuson on sikandin no warad nakako-on to homoy rin.
Nò, mataltahuroy kow tibo su duon pogtahud now ki Hisu Kristu.
[Nigtanob ka woig dio’t pantad.]
Nò, kagi rin kuwo kandin, “Dio ka ogpandop-ug to sikan no nalinsobuk no woig no oghingaranan to Siloam.” Ka kalitukan to Siloam, “Pinaalap.” Nò, nighondio ka nabutud, nigpandop-ug on sikandin woy niglibong no nakakita on.
langow
Niglibuwas on woy si Hisus to lunsud no nigtiang din ka krus din no nanhondio to tano no oghingaranan dan to Golgota ko Hinibriu no kinagian. Ka kalitukan to sikan no kagi, ‘Bokog to Ulu.’
Ogsaligan din kun ka Magboboot woy sikandin kun ka anak to Magboboot. Pitawon ta naan kuntoon ko ogpangabangan sikandin to Magboboot.” Soini ka kagi ran.
To nigtupang si Hisus to bubungan, mohon-ing lagboy ka mgo otow no nigduma kandin.
Ka songo ogkatanuran ta to ogsagap so mgo manggi-anak no warò ogmango-onon dan su bitil kuntoon.
Pinanglimusongon so suu.
tokas
Ka hapuy, mo-obol
Nigparagas pad nigkagi si Hisus. Kagi rin, “Ko ogdakopon kow no ighatod kow dio to tangkaan to talagboot, kono kow ogkasasow ko nokoy ka igtabak now dio. Ko ogpakagion ka, nangoni nu ro to impasabuk to goinawa nu. Ian su konon koykow no pogdoromdom ka oglibuwas to bo-bo nu su ka Gimukud to Magboboot ka igsabuk to goinawa nu.
No ka mgo Hudiu no nigtuu ki Hisus no nanduma ki Pedro, nabolongbolong su songo imbogoy to Magboboot ka Gimukud din to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu.
bayad
warò
Ayad-ayad kow oyow kono ogkaraat ka maroyow no nohimu kaniu no nigligkat to pog-anad noy. Ian su oyow uromo, ogkoutol now rod ka tibo no igbogoy to Magboboot no igsayo din kaniu.
Ogtinda ka boyow din.
Takas nigkuo din on ka papitu no malison no paan woy ka mamalintok bag no ngalap woy nigpasalamatan din ka Magboboot. Takas, nigpanlotiblotib din on no inpamogoy rin to mgo hibatoon din. Inlogoblogob dan to mgo otow.
woy ko
tonggak
No nataga a to waro tagu no maroyow duon to sikan no tahan no ogkoiniatan to lawa ku su agad to ogkoiniat a no oghimu to maroyow di kono a ogpakatood no oghimu.
Malinow ka sikan no lunggunan, warò igkasasow.
Woy mohon-ing ka ogdinogon now no marani kaniu no mgo samuk su duon gira. Woy ogdinogon now ka mgo nangnangonon bahin to gira dio to mariu no ugpaan. Di kono kow ogkahallok su tibo soini ogkatuman to kono pad ka katamanan to kalibutan.
Ko du-on oggalat to mgo batò, ogka-awoy ka inoy.
Kono a ogbogoy ko boi ka og-anad to mgo lukos dio to ampuanan woy ko ogpaampow ka boi to katondanan to mgo lukos. Di og-awoson to ogpamminog do sikandan to ig-anad kandan.
Nò, sikaniu, mgo sulod, sumsumana now ka goinawa now ko tu-tuu ian to niggongonan now si Hisus. Woy doromdoma now ka pogtuu now ko malogot ian to nasagboka kow on ki Hisu Kristu. Di ko kono no malogot ka pogtuu now kandin, waro labot din kaniu.
til-as
kumabas
liwak
sugud
Kono man. Di soini ka kalitukan to ignangon ku. Ka igpanubad to mgo otow no waro mataga to tu-tuu ian no Magboboot, igkasayo dan to mgo busow, kono no ka Magboboot. No kono a ogkoiniat ko ogparumdumooy kow to mgo busow.
Ogtotomog ki diò to taliwarò to turakan no igsugbuk ta ka sikan no bogas to katumbal.
Ian oyow ogkounawa kow koddi no Kakoy to koot-otawan kai to kalibutan to waro a nighondii oyow koddi ka ogpangabangan to mgo otow, di nighondii a oyow ogpakapangabang a kandan woy koddi ka ogpakapangabang to mohon-ing no mgo otow pinabayo to kamatayon ku.”
Ka manggianak, ogdilin to ko-onon no ighonat to songo baloy su naam pà ko ogkamatayan to batò.
ko-on
koput
Ian su agad hondoi longod no otow, ko Hudiu woy ko kono no Hudiu, ogkounawa ro su ka Magboboot ian ian Lagboy no Igbuyag to agad hondoi no mgo otow, no dakol ka pogkohoy-u rin to mgo otow no ogsampit to ngaran din, agad hontow.
palad
warò goinawa
To nakarinog ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad, mgo talag-anad to Balaod dan, nigmal-alukuyoy kandan ko ogmonuon dan oyow ogpohimatayan dan si Hisus. Nahallok sikandan to ogdakop ki Hisus su noinuinu ka tibo no mgo otow to mgo in-anad din.
ulug
Nò, su anak kinow ian to Magboboot, kono ki poron ogdoromdom to ogkoiling ka Magboboot to mgo inotow-otow no nohimu no uru, woy ko bulawan, woy ko batu no ogpanhimuon to mgo otow no ogligkat do duon to natouan dan woy ka ogkaroromdom dan.
Nò, nigpulasan to bituon ka sikan no bitu. No duon niglibuwas no makopal lagboy no obol. No ian ogkounawaan ka obol no ogligkat to dakol no ogkasilaban. No nigmarusilom on ka kalibutan woy naatangan ka layag to allow su ligkat to obol no niglibuwas to sikan no bitu.
Tibo kanta, og-awoson to ogpaagad-agad kinow to mgo otow no og-alap to katondanan to mgo ugpaan kai to kalibutan, su waro igbuyag to songo ugpaan ko kono no boot to Magboboot ka pogsugu dan. No ka katondanan dan, songo ogligkat dod to kandin.
sinulid
Nighondio si Pilipi ki Andres woy nignangonan din sikandin. Nigduma si Andres ki Pilipi dio ki Hisus woy nignangonan dan on.
Ian su, ko iam pad mokouma si Pedro, no ko niglimudlimud sikandan to ogkoon, nig-amut pad sikandin to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. Dokad di, no nokouma on ka mgo Hudiu no nigsugu ni Santiago, warad nig-amut si Pedro kandan su nahallok to ogkasamilian to sikan no mgo Hudiu no ogpatuman poron to mgo Balaod ni Moisis.
Ka otow no ogbangan, ogbantoy to dalan no ogkabaya-an to igbuyag dan.
No ka tibo no sikan no mohon-ing no mgo otow, nigpoomot kandan to ogsamsam ki Hisus su duon kabogbogan no ogligkat kandin no ogpakabawi to tibo no mgo otow ko ogpakasamsam kandin.
Ian to niggalat ku sikoykow dio to Krita su oyow oghipongaan nud ka talabau ku no wa pad mapongoi, woy to oyow dio to agad hondoi no ugpaan no duon mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus, ogkaalam nud on ka mgo otow no ogkohimu on no pogbuyagon kandan. No ko og-alamon nud ka mgo pogbuyagon, kono nu kalingawi ka tahan no innangon ku koykow,
Ogsayoon ta ka Magboboot no ogkatou no oghogot to pogtuu now ligkat to soini no ignangonnangon ku tongod ki Hisu Kristu. Ka soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon, ingkoholos pad dongan.
ol-ol
luyung
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to, “Sikaniu ka nigdumaruma koddi no waro a now ongkori ko duon nabayaan ku no mohirap.
Nò, ka mgo otow dio to libuwasan, nigtatagad ki Sakarias. Nabolongbolong sikandan ko nokoy ka inkalugoy rin dio to solod to Ampuanan dan.
Nig-ugsul on ka mgo pilitianan to mgo sakayan.
No kagi pa ni Sakarias to anak din, “No koykow no bato, ogkohingaranan ka uromo to talagnangon to kagi no ogligkat to Magboboot no kinalabawan sikandin. Ogpokohun-a ka kandin no ognangonnangon to oyow ogpakapanagana on ka mgo otow to pogdatong to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
bunduy
mukus
Mohon-ing so mgo otow no nanhondio ki Hisus. Kagi ran, “Waro nighimu si Huan to mgo igkoinuinu di malogot man ka tibo no innangon din bahin to soin no lukos.”
No si Hisus, nataga on to niglibuwas to lawa rin ka doisok no kabogbogan din to ogbawi. Niglingi si Hisus to sikan mgo otow no ogluyud kandin no nig-inso din, “Hontow ka nigsamsam to kinabo ku?”
Si Hisus dod ka intuon dongan to mgo talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot to innangon dan to duon batu no og-ongkoran on nikaniu no mgo talaghimu to baloy. Di sikan dod ian ka batu no pig–alam to Magboboot. No ian ka nohimu no unturanan to baloy su si Hisus, ian ka nohimu on no Talagpangabang to mgo salo ta. Ian su agad hondoi ka ogpakarolog, waro dangob no ngaran no litos to ogkasampit to mgo otow ko kono no si Hisus do ian ka ogpakapangabang kanta no makasasalo.”
Poglogsad noy, nigkita koy to barku no oghondio to probinsia to Pinisia. Nigsakoy koy on woy nigligkat koy on.
Waro duma no igkarago ku no ogkounawa to sikan no igkarago no ogligkat to ogdinogon ku, tongod to mgo otow no nohimu no anak ku to pogtuu, to ogpaagad-agad sikandan to soini no tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon.
No ko duon otow no ogdaat to sikan no Baloy to Magboboot, songo ogdaaton to Magboboot sikandin su ogkannugunan to Magboboot ka og-ugpaan din, no sikanta ka sikan no baloy rin.
No ko dio a to sikan no mgo otow no ogtuu on di waro amana makasabut, songo nig-iling a kandan su og-awoson ku to ogkohogot ku ka pogtuu ran. No to tibo no otow, nig-iling a to batasan dan su ogpamangho a to dalan ku to oyow ogkabaghotan ku ka tibo poron to oyow duon ka ogtuu on ki Hisus oyow ogkapangabangan din.
kolid
Ongsig ka rò diò su ogkapipi ad.
Ogpasalamat a to Magboboot to ian ku ro nigbautismuan dio to kaniu, si Krispo woy si Gayo,
Ka poghipanow on ni Silas woy si Pablo tatolu ki Timoteo ligkat to Listra, no nanagpitsagpit pad to mgo lunsud no nignangnangonan dan ka mgo otow no nigtuu ki Hisus dio ko nokoy ka innangon to sulat no nig–alap dan ligkat to mgo suguanon ni Hisus woy ka mgo pogbuyagon to mgo nigtuu no dio to Hirusalim.
Di ian tu-tuu no sakup to Magboboot, ka otow no duon dio to goinawa ran ka igmaganangon to nohimu on sikandan no sakup to Magboboot. No ka sikan, ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot. Kono ogligkat to lawa ta no impatuli do duon. No ka sikan no mgo otow, kono ogsayoon to mgo otow di ogkasayo atag to Magboboot.
Ko naangoy ran on ka mgo suguanon ni Hisus, impatangko dan sikandan to mgo pogbuyagon to mgo Hudiu. No ka Labow no Talagpanubad, nig–insoinso to mgo suguanon ni Hisus.
Songo niglayag ka sabinit dan. Ka pogpaalukuyoy ran ki Hisus, bahin to kamatayon ni Hisus no dio ogkatuman to lunsud to Hirusalim.
how-as
Ko nigbogoy to sulat, nigpatimul to nangon no igpasiguru no ogpasabuk bag to agoloy
Konon ubat-ubat pad ian su so-ini mata ku ka nigpayagan nu.
bonì
tongos
Ka sikan no boi, nataga to nokoy ka nohimu to lawa rin no nigdani dio to tangkaan ni Hisus no ogkolkolon su nahallok. Nigluhud no nignangon kandin bahin to oggaramon din mgo pogtuu rin kandin woy to nabawian on ko nigsamsam din ka kinabo din.
Ogbuyu a to oyow ogkohoy-uan kow tibo to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisu Kristu.
Ka hikot, ian ka gopot. Ka gopot, oglug-ian ka oghikotan.
Nigparagas si Hisus to kagi rin to, “Kaniu no mgo taga Kapirnaum, nahan now buwa to sikaniu ka labowlabow to duma no mgo lunsud, dokad di to igdogpak kow atag dio to logparanan no hapuy.”
Pangul-ul si Impì.
Ogkokoulug ka mgo bituon woy ogpasuwayon to tahan no bayaan dan ka mgo planeta woy agad nokoy duon dio to langit.
bulun
Kai dò manusugba’t solib
logs
Sikaniu no mgo lukos no duon on asawa now, igdakoli now ka asawa now to goinawa unawa ki Kristu no indakoli rin to goinawa ka mgo otow no ogtuu kandin. Woy imbogoy rin ka lawa rin to oyow ogkohimatayan on no igpangabang kanta no mgo makasasalo.
kolilit
Agad to ogkitoon dan ka tibo no nighimu ku to sikan no kohop-atan no tuid, malasi a ran og-ol-ologi.
Ko nigtotomog a to kayu no nalotoman on ka hapuy, nigdokotan on woy nigbaga on.
tigbas
Nò, nabolu lagboy soini no labow no igbuyag. Nigsugu din ka mgo sundalu rin dio to mgo otow no nighimatoy to mgo suguanon din woy songo pigpohimatayan sikandan woy nigpasilaban din ka lunsud dan.
na-an dò
Nò, noumaan on to daruwa on no tuid ni Pablo dio to pirisuan taman to si Porsiu Pistu ka nakaliwan on no gobirnador to katondanan ni Pilik. Dokad di, waro palibuwasa ni Pilik si Pablo no napirisu su ogkoiniatan din to ogmaroyow ro ka goinawa to mgo Hudiu kandin.
kundab
Nò, to sikan no Allow to Oghimoloy to mgo Hudiu, nig-anad si Hisus to mgo otow dio to songo anaranan to mgo og-ampu.
Hiponu-a nu ka liang to homoy.
Og-alam a to baloy no mamalu-ag ko warò otow no og-ugpò.
Ka woig no Liboganon, makopal ka mgo tibogow diò to napu no mabasag ka lawa rin
No si Istiban, nohoy–uan to Magboboot woy nigbogayan to dakol no kabogbogan. Mohon–ing ka nohimu rin no mgo kabolongbolonganan woy ka mgo indanan no igmalogot to innangonnangon din.
balangotì
Nigsugu ni Hisus to, “Awaa now ka batu no inlokob.” Di si Marta, ataboy to namatoy, nigkagian din si Hisus. Kagi rin, “Buyag, masongot on. Hop-at on no allow rin dut sabalanan.”
Di ko nigdinog dan to nootawan on si Hisus woy to nigkita ni Maria sikandin, waro tuui sikandin.
Og-awoson to tu-tuu ian to dakol ka goinawa ta to duma ta. Og-awoson ta no og-iniugan ta ka agad nokoy no batasan no maroot, di oggongonan ta ka tibo no batasan no maroyow.
mintin
Ogpabubuligoy kinow no kono ta ogdoromdomon ka kanta ro no og-awosonon, di songo ogdoromdomon ta ka mgo og-awoson to duma ta.
Ka sikan no doun ka ogdokdokon no ogpogo-on ka woig.
Nò, to nakahimata si Husi, pigtuman din ka kagi to diwata to Magboboot dio to kandin. Nò, pig-asawa rin on si Maria.
libuas
luiton
lumansad
golong
Nò ka agad hontow no nasagboka ki Hisu Kristu, nabogayan on sikandin to iam no pogkouyag. No naawo on ka tahan no pogkootow rin no naliwanan on to iam.
banoy1
suluk
Duon pad mgo boni no nakasawod dio to maroyow no tano, nigtubu woy nigtuga. Duon duma no namogasan to songo gatus. Woy songo duon namogasan to kohon-oman. Woy songo duon namogasan to katoluan.”
Nò, ko nigtokoran a nu no duma nu songo ogtokoron nu rod si Unisimu, no tagibaloy to nasagman a nu ro ko oghinguma on dio to koykow.
obol
Pogsolod poron ni Hisus to songo lunsud duon to ogkabayaanan din, nakatagbu kandin to sampulu no lukos no ibungon no ka sikan no mgo otow nigsasindog to mariu do ki Hisus
Kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta kandin to, “Sasindog ka woy hondio kad to dalan no oghingaranan to Matul–id. Pamanghaa nud ka baloy to songo otow no oghingaranan ki Hudas su duon otow no nig-ugpo to baloy rin no taga Tarsu. Ka ngaran din si Saulo, no og–ampu kanak.
obuk
Kagi pa ni Hisus kandan to, “Koddi, og-awa a pad dini. Ungod a now ogpamitawa di kona a now ogkitoon. Ogkamatoy kow ro no wa maawo ka salo now. Kono kow ogpakasundul dio to ogdatongan ku.”
Ian dò ogka-alapan no kinagian ko du-on duma ta no oghinggat to ogparigus no ogkagian ku to, “Alap ka rò to sabun no mohomut.”
buyu
Woy nigsugu a rin to oyow ogpohitagoon ku ka agad hondoi no mgo otow ko ogmonuon to Magboboot ka pogtuman to tuud din no waro pad dongan ipohitaga to mgo otow. Ian su ka Magboboot no ian talaghimu to agad nokoy no kalaglagan no nohimu on, inholos din pad ka sikan no tuud din.
Duon igbuyag dan no ogboboot kandan. Ian ka diwata no nigpulas to sikan no bitu no kono ogkatogkad ka karalomi rin. Ka ngaran din to kinagian to Hinibriu, si Abadun. No to kinagian to Ginirigu, si Apuliun. No to kanta no kinagian, Talag-ubus.
olod
dusmul
Songo kono ki poron ogpakasumansuman ko hontow pa ka ogkasugu ta no oghondio to ugpaan to mgo nammatoy pananglitan ko ogkaangoy pa poron si Hisu Kristu oyow ogkouyag to pogkamatoy rin.
bokò
Ian to ignangon ku kaniu ka soini su ka tu-tuu no sakup to Magboboot, kono no ka mgo otow no nohimu no Hudiu no ligkat do to pogkootow ran woy kono no ka mgo otow no nigpatuli to lawa ran.
Nighutuk nignangon si Hisus kandan oyow ogpakasabut porom sikandan. Kagi rin, “Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku kaniu. Koddi ka gumawan to sikan no alad to karniru.
pungul
Di ka koddi no ig-anad atag, kagi ni Hisus, ogdakolon now ka goinawa now to mgo usig now woy ampui now ka mgo otow no ogbayadbayad kaniu.
tangus
bila
Kagi ran, “Nigbogoy si Moisis no og-ongkoran to lukos ka asawa rin ko oghimuon din kandin ka sulat to og-ongkod.”
lokas
Ian su si Hisu Kristu, nigtuman to koiniatan to Amoy rin, no kono no ka kandin do no koiniatan su duon ingkasulat dongan no kinagian to Magboboot to, “Nasugat a to kagi to mgo otow no nigdoot koykow.”
No napolod koy tibo duon to ogsasindogan noy. No duon nigdinog ku no kagi to kinagian to Hinibriu to, ‘Saulo, Saulo, manio to ogbaybayaran a nu? Unawa to ogkasakitan ka karabau no ogsipo to magalang no duon to daru, songo ogkasakitan ka to pog–atu nu kanak,’ kagi ni Hisus.
Sikan ian no nigtinawo kud on dio to diwata ka sikan no doisok no ogbasoon no nabolat on, woy nigkoon kud on. No ko kai pad to bo-bo ku, moomis no ogkounawa ian to tonob. Di to pog-abolong ku, nigmapoit on.
Ogtogkaron ta ka songo otow ko maroyow ka batasan din.
Timoteo, udlingi nu ka mgo otow no nigtuu no duon dakol no salapi dan to oyow kono dan ogparakoldakol woy to oyow kono dan ogsaligan ka salapi dan no magaan do ogkoubus. Di ian dan do poron ogsaligan ka Magboboot no malasi ogbogoy kanta to agad nokoy to oyow ogkarago kinow.
logdog
og-ay-ayaman
Nighoo si Pilatu. Nò, nigpantigan to mgo sundalu ka lison to sikan no darua no lukos no songo nighimatayan dan dio to krus no si Hisus ka igkatatolu ran.
Ka sulod ku no nigsambaan to liwarò to kausiloman, ungod nigpangumow to, “Buligi a now su ogkalonod koy on.”
Nigpasambayan din ka duma no salapi din to tagsagboka no suguanon din sumalo to katouanan dan. Ka sagboka kandan, nigbogayan din to lalima libu no malison no boronsi no salapi. Ka dangob nigbogayan din to daruan libu, woy ka dangob nigbogayan din to songo libu. Pogkaponga, nigligkat on sikandin.
ima
Ka ambung, ian ka ogkasabukan to ogngangalap.
ligid
simana
bu-ol
tangkò
Nataga a to uromo no waro ad kai, duon oglopow kai to kaniu su oyow ogpasuwayon ka pogtuu now. No ian dan ogkounawaan ka mgo magintalunan no asu no kono man ogkohoy–u to ogdawion dan.
Agad ko waro a dio to kaniu kuntoon di ogkounawa to dio a rod to kaniu su dio ka goinawa ku no natagaan kud on ko ogmonuon kud ka sikan no otow no nighimu to maroot.
Ka baloy no ogkasilaban, awos to og-obukan.
No kagi rin to, “Igsabut ku koykow to ogkohoy-uan ku sikoykow woy ogmohon-ingon kud ka mgo pinanganak nu.”
manokalad
Natampod ka kayamoy no tindalikday ni Igi.
Kagi buwa to mgo otow, “Ian na-an ko ogsangkod on si Huan, konad buwa ian oghalin ko ogkagikagi si Huan.”
Nò, su ingkapanagana on ka sikan no daruwa no sinabong, ka mgo talagpanubad, ogpakasolod on allow-allow to sikan no an-anayan no sinabong no ogtuman to sikan no ingkasugu kandan.
Du-on ka mgo otow no nigtilala kanak no nigsagpit diò to baloy ku no nigbuyù to og-inum
kutkut
bigtow
Pananglitan ko duon otow no duon songo gatus no ayam din no karniru, woy ko ogkalagak ka sagboka, nokoy ka oghimuon din? Og-ongkoran din ka kasiaman woy sasiam dio to sika panabtabanan woy ogpamanghoon din ka sika sagboka no ayam no nalagak.
Malogot ka soin no ogkagion ku koykow,” kagi ni Hisus. “Ignangon noy ka natagaan noy woy ignangon noy atag ka nakitaan noy. Di waro atag no sagboka now no ogtuman to ignangon noy.
Agad ogpakasalo koykow to kapapitu to sagboka ro no allow woy ko oghondio to koykow no ogkagi koykow to, ‘Pigsonditan kud ka salo ku,’ pasaylua nu sikandin.”
tampak
No ko ogpaboot ki kandin, kono ki ogmarayandayan woy kono ta ogsasawon ka duma ta woy songo kono ki ogsilag to mgo kalaglagan dan.
Pogpitow ku to sikan no boi no nalasing sikandin to mgo langosa to mgo otow no sakup to Magboboot woy ka langosa to mgo nigtuu ki Hisus no nighimatayan dan su ligkat to pogtuu ran kandin. Pogpitow ku to sikan no boi no nabolongbolong ad on ian lagboy.
tongtong
Di si Pilipi atag, diad on makita to lunsud to Asutu no nigparagas to poghipanow rin no oghondio to Sisaria. No innangonnangon din ka Maroyow no Nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus dio to tibo no mgo lunsud dio to ogkabayaan din.
“Kono ka ogpakaparagas dio to baloy ku, Buyag,” kagi to kapitan, “su ogkasipod a to kona a ogpakasokod koykow su doisok ka koddi no katondanan. Di sikoykow, agad ognangon ka ro to ogkabawian on sikandin, no ogkabawian on ian ka suguanon ku.
Nò, hondio kow nasi to mgo dalan woy pohindini now to soin no pogkoon to kasal ka tibo no ogkitoon now no mgo otow.’
Ko ogkatangkoban ka dilò, ogkatampod.
anokot
“Sikan ian to og–awoson to duon sagboka no otow no og–alamon ta no igtimul kanta no suguanon ni Hisus su oyow sikandin on ka ogbulig kanta to ogmalogot to pogkouyag ni Hisus ligkat to kamatayon din. No ian ta ro og–alamon ka otow no songo nigdumaruma kanta no nigluyudluyud to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus ligkat to pogbautismu ni Huan taman to allow no pogbatun ni Hisus.” Sikan do ka kagi ni Pedro kuwo to mgo duma rin.
tungkuy
lalud
inagak
bugsong
Nakagdongan to pogkamatoy ni Hisus, napori on ka sikan malayat no lagboy no makopal no manggad no duon to gumawan to songo sinabong dio to solod to sikan no Dakol no Ampuanan dan. Ko napori, dio to ampow nigbunsud taman to diralom.
Nò, agad to waro nigkita to agad nokoy no salo no litos to pogkamatoy ni Hisus, di nigbuyu dan dod ki Pilatu to oyow ogpohimatayan din on.
Ogguguson to malogot ka mgo alad now no batu, no ka mgo batu, warad ogkagalat agad sagboka no batu dio to nasabukan to soini. Tibo ogkoubus ka baloy now woy ka mgo otow to soini no ugpaan now, su waro now tokora sikandin to nighondini to kaniu oyow ogpakalipuas kaniu.” Ian ka kagi ni Hisus to nakasinogow.
No sikaniu no kono no Hudiu, songo nalagkos kow no songo nohimu kow on no mgo pagtukud no ighimu to soini no baloy no ogkougpaan to Magboboot. No ian to nalagkos kow su ligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot no og-ugpo to goinawa tanow.
Di soini ro, kono do no malugoy no sikoddi no ian Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan, dio a ogpakapinnuu to dapit to kawanan to Mabogbog no Magboboot.”
boluk
limud
Nig-inso sikandin to, “Songo monu ka igbayad now koddi ko ighatod ku si Hisus kaniu?” Sikan ian no nigsool dan ka katoluan no malison no salapi woy imbogoy ran ki Hudas.
Naan ta buwa ko ka Balaod ni Moisis, ogpakabalabag to sikan no sabut to Magboboot ki Abraham. Kono man su ko duon pa Balaod no ogpakabogoy to kouyagan no waro katamanan, litos poron to ogkohimu kid on no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot no ogligkat to pogtuman ta to sikan no Balaod din.
Og-aras-aras si Igì su warò ogtamong to anak din no konò ogpakapangali.
Nigbogayan kinow ni Hisus to katondanan oyow ogpakabulig ki to pog-alap din to pandatuan din. Woy nohimu kinow on no mgo talagpanubad dio to tangkaan to Magboboot no ian Magboboot din dod woy Amoy rin. No si Hisu Kristu ka litos no ogkasayo ta woy to og-alap to pandatuan din woy ka kabogbogan din to waro katamanan. Malogot ian ka soini.
Ko mananoy ogpakakita to duma ta, ogka-alimotow ki to ugpa-an ta.
Nokogsolsol ka goinawa ni Hirodis di su imparinog din ka kagi rin to tibo no mgo otow, mgo magaliug din, kono ogkaayun to ogligal pad to ogbuyuon to sika nigsayow.
Du-on gabas noy no tatamporoy to atop.
bukod to lasù
kuò
Sikan ian to innangon to talagbantoy ki Pablo to kagi to mgo pogbuyagon. Kagi to talagbantoy to, “Nigsugu ad to mgo pogbuyagon noy to oyow ogpalibuwason ku sikaniu. No kuntoon, hipanow kow on no maroyow ka poghipanow now.”
woy nigsugu to, “Nangoni now ka mgo otow, to marusilom no nohirogo kow, nighondio ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus woy nigtakow ran ka lawa rin.
Ko ogkagi ka ubun-ubun, ogkagi to bagu-bù, huun, huun, huun.
Pogkita noy to pulu to Sipri, nagibang noy to nigbayo no nigparagas koy on dio to Siria, no dio koy nigduung to lunsud to Tiru su duon dan do ilogsad ka kalaglagan no impountud to barku.
Ian su ko ogmanalinga on ka allow, ogmoinit on no ogkalanos on ka mgo hilamonon no ogkapadpad on ka mgo bulak dan. No warad on ka igkaroyow ran. Ogkounawa rod ka mgo datu su ogkasalanganan on to pogkamatoy ran no ogkoongkoran dan do duon ka igkatiglingoy ran.
Di ko waro otow no duon kabogbogan din to oglituk, og-awoson to kono do og-uwang dio to nalimud no mgo otow ka ogkagi poron to sikan no loin no kinagian. Di litos no igkagi dio to goinawa rin no ogkagian din ka Magboboot.
“No,” kagi ni Hisus, “ligkat to in-anad now konad on litos no ogbuligan ta ka amoy ta woy inoy ta. Soini ka nighimu now su oyow kono kow ogpaagad-agad to kinagian to Magboboot oyow ogkatuman ka kaniu no ig-anad.
No, nigsugu ni Hisus sikandin to, “Ko nu nangoni ka agad hontow to nabawian on ka kogang nu; hondio kad nasi to talagpanubad to Magboboot no ipapitow nu kandin to warad on ka ibung to lawa nu. Ibogoy nu to Magboboot ka insugu ni Moisis dongan no igtubad su ian ka igpoitaga to mgo otow to malogot ian no noulian kad on.”
salapid
Nò, naramoy on ka duma no otow dio to Episu su nigtangkap on ka samuk dio to tibo to sikan no lunsud dan. Sikan ian to niggongonan to mgo otow ka daruwa no duma ni Pablo no taga Masidonia no si Gayo woy si Aristarku. No piggaganoy ran on sikandan dio to dakol no limuranan to mgo otow.
Songo allow nanakoy si Hisus mgo hibatoon din to balutu. Kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Talipag kinow dio to doipag to soini no lanow.” Nò, nigtalipag dan on.
igtagad to magaliug
No nig-inso sikandan tibo ki Hisus to, “Ian ignangon nu kanami to sikoykow ka Anak to Magboboot?” Kagi ni Hisus, “Sikan ian ka innangon now.”
‘Kagi to Lagboy to Igbuyag to, Uromo, oglibongan ku ka pandatuan ni Igbuyag Dabid. Woy oglindogon kud on ka katondanan din no natampod on.
lagting
Bobolugan
bagukbuk
Nò, su nohimu koy on no talagbulig to Magboboot, duon ogbuyuon noy kaniu no nabogayan on to ingkohoy-u to Magboboot. No ian noy igbuyu to oyow kono now ogdaaton ka sikan no ingkohoy-u rin kaniu.
alimpulus
Pogkaponga, nigpurut ni Hisus ka songo malison no paan no nigpasalamatan din pad ka Magboboot. Pogkaponga rin to nigpasalamat, nanlotiblotib din on ka paan no impanalad din on to mgo hibatoon din no imparuma rin ka kagi rin kandan to, “Ka soini no paan no nalotiblotib on ka lawa ku no igbogoy ku no igtobus kaniu. Koon kow to soini no ian now doromdoma sikoddi.”
Ka kayu no maroot so bogas din, ogpoloron woy ogsilaban.
kolong
suntuk
Ogkilos ka ligid ko du-on palì su og-uwang ka kalamag.
togkad
Duon dangob no pananglitan ni Hisus. Kagi ni Hisus, “Kono tad ogtabason ka iam no kinabo oyow igtupak to tahan no kinabo. Ko oghimuon ta ka soini ogkaraat ka iam no kinabo woy ka igtupak no iam kono no unawa to tahan no kinabo.”
tagad
hilut
ogko-ibog
pungos
To nigkita soini to mgo hibatoon ni Hisus, nabolu sikandan no kagi ran, “Manio to nigdaat din do soini?
Nasalupung ka bogas to bugkò no ogmalapung
Ko sikan pad ogbunsuri no ogga-ani, konò ogpakabayò ka otow su ogkadugnalan ka ogga-ani.
Nò, ogbuyu a to Magboboot oyow ogbogayan din sikoykow to maawang no goinawa. Ka mgo duma ta kai to kanak, ogpangumusta koykow. Woy ogbuyu a koykow to oglogoblogob a no ogpangumusta to mgo duma nu.
Kagi ni Hisus, “Malogot man ka soini no kagi ku kaniu. Agad hontow ka talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, kono man ogtinawoon to mgo otow duon to kandin no lunsud.”
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, og-awoson to ogmalayaton ta ka goinawa ta to ogtatagad taman to oglibong ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta kai to soini no kalibutan. Doromdoma now ka otow no ogpamula to boni no ogmalayat to pog-iman-iman to goinawa rin to ogtatagad to an-anayan no uran woy mohuri no uran no iglaslas no igpoinug on to homoy.
Digusa nu ka nigpungos no batò.
Poggakap dan on, pigsakolow to Gimukud to Magboboot si Pilipi no warad kitaa to taga Itiopia. Di nigparagas on ka taga Itiopia to poghipanow rin no ungod ogkarago.
Di soini tibo atag ogkoimu oyow ogkatuman ka impasulat to Magboboot to talagnangon dongan.” Nò, nig-ongkod on ka tibo no mgo hibatoon din kandin woy namallaguy on.
Di nakatotongtong ka mgo pogbuyagon su ka langlanguwan ni Istiban, nigmalayag on no ogkoiling to langlanguwan to diwata.
Ko oglapas ki diò to doipag to woig, ogka-alus ki ko mabolbol ka woig to pog-apot ta.
sapatus
kogal
Ian su, tongod to pogsugu to Magboboot kanta, waro pulus ko nokoy ka ogkakoon ta woy ko nokoy ka og-inumon ta. Di ian do duon pulus ko oghimu kinow on to maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, woy og-awoson to ogmaawang ka goinawa ta kandin woy to mgo duma ta, woy ko duon on igkarago ta no ogligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot.
Nigdanian ni Hisus ka nigdaralu no niggongonan din ka bolad din no nigbuligan din sikandin to og-onow. Nigparagas nigsasindog su noulian on ka dalu rin no sikan do ian no nigpakoon din si Hisus mgo duma rin.
gumulonting
kalabun
talugabi
Ko ogko-ongkoran ka sikan no ugpa-an, warad otow no ogdinogon ta no ogkakagi.
subid
Mgo sulod, ogbuyu koy kaniu to oyow og-udlingan now ka mgo otow no pogulon oyow ogtalabau. Ogmaroyawon ta ka goinawa to mgo otow no ogkounus. Ogbuligan ta ka mgo otow no malintok ka pogtuu ran oyow ogmasalig on ka pogtuu ran, woy ogmalayaton ta ka goinawa ta to tibo no mgo otow.
No to pogkabayo dan, tibo kandan nakakoon to sikan no impakoon to Magboboot kandan.
Ka otow no natokow to masakit ka kiloy rin, ogbangi-on sikandin.
Nò, kagi ni Hisus, “Duon songo datu no mohingaran no oghipanow pad no oghondio to mariu no ugpaan oyow oghingaranan to labow no igbuyag kai to ugpaan din. Pogkaponga dio, ogbantaan din ian to og-uli dio to kandin no ugpaan.
Ko natuman ka darua no allow, kagi ni Hisus kuwo to mgo hibatoon din, “Oglibong kinow pad dio to Hudia.”
apulun
Salsaligan ta si Alikas
Nò, sikan ian, og-awoson no oghagtong ki no ogsamili to duma ta ko loin ka pogtuman din to pogtuu rin. Di ian ta og-awoson to oyow ogtuud ki to oyow waro oghimuon ta no ogpakapasuwoy to duma ta no nigtuu.
Nigkagi ni Pedro no kagi rin ki Hisus, “Maistru, maroyow to duon koy kai no oghimuon noy ka tatolu no tukbung, sagboka ka koykow, sagboka no litos ki Ilias woy sagboka pad no litos ki Moisis.”
Pogkaponga, nig–umow rin ka daruwa no kapitan no kagi to igbuyag dan to, “Limura now on ka daruwa no gatus no sundalu no oghipanow, woy kapituan no sundalu no ogpanguddo, woy daruwa no gatus no sundalu no og–alap to kommag. Tagama kow on oyow ogpakaligkat kow on angkuwan to alas nuibi to kuntoon do no marusilom su ogsuguan kow dio to lunsud to Sisaria.
Nò. Nigsasindog on ka Parisiu no nig-ampu dio to goinawa rin. Kagi rin, ‘Magboboot, ogpasalamatan ku sikoykow to koddi no batasan, waro a mounawa to duma no mgo otow. Kono a og-agow to salapi to duma ku, kona a oggawoy to duma no mgo otow, woy kona a oghilabot to mgo boi no kono no asawa ku. Agad salamat to kona a no unawa to sooyo no talagkubla to buhis.
lintak
luglug
Patapid to panabas
gubat
Toptop, ka ogsokodsokod; warò ogmalayat
sarimbal
kolopkolop
Oghalin a pad to songo ugpa-an.
Ka alag,  maporos ko ogsopo-on ta
Ko ogma-am-amanoloy ki to duma ta, ko du-on maintok no problima, maga-an dò ogka-awò.
kupkup
Ka inoy, oggalatan to homoy no igpalugaw no igpako-on to anak din.
No nigbabantoy ka mgo otow ki Pablo su nahan dan no oghiluon no oglobag ka lawa rin woy ko ogkapolod no ogkamatoy on. Di to pogkalugoy ran on to nigbabantoy no waro man mogmalotoy si Pablo, nabalowbalawan on ka pogdoromdom dan. No kagi ran atag to, “Magboboot nanaan ka soini no otow.”
Du-on gabas no nigsamboy to songo otow. Takas din to niggamit, impasamboy rin man dò to songo otow.
Ka soini no ignangon ku, tu-tuu ian no litos ko ogtiboon ta ogtuuan.
nu-nù
Nò, ka asawa ni Sibidiu nigdani to longod ki Hisus no nigduma rin ka darua no mgo anak din. Nigluhud sikandan dio to tangkaan ni Hisus, su duon ogbuyuon din.
Ogpatokoron din ka mgo otow to makasasalo sikandan su waro mogtuu koddi to anak a to Magboboot.
tabang
“Ogkohimu,” kagi ni Hisus, “Awo kow on.” Nò, niglibuwas on no nigsolod sikandan to mgo babuy. Tibo ka sikan no mgo babuy nigpallaguy no nakatinugpu sikandan dio to lanow no nallonod ka tibo.
salapuyan
burak
Kono now alapa ka salapi no bulawan woy ko boronsi.
porom
Ian su mgo busow ka sikan, no duon kabogbogan dan to ogpanhimuon dan to mgo kabolongbolonganan. No nigsugu sikandan dio to tibo no mgo dakol no igbuyag dio to agad hondoi kai to kalibutan oyow ogkalimudlimud on sikandan woy ka mgo sundalu ran. Ian su ko ogdagsang on ka mabantug no allow to pogboboot to Magboboot, ogsulungan dan sikandin no ian ka Mamabogbog to tibo.
Di kagi ni Hisus to, “Manio to ogkaaras kow woy manio to ogduwa-duwa ka goinawa now?
kalayati
Ko nigtotomog a to kayu no nalotoman on ka hapuy no oglogdog on.
No su dakol ka goinawa to Magboboot kanta, tahan on no nigboot sikandin to oyow ogkohimu kinow on no anak din ligkat to nighimu ni Hisu Kristu. Sikan ian ka tuud din woy ka ogkoiniatan din.
Dokad di, su to tibo no mgo tuid ogpokohutukhutuk to oghimatoy to igtubad dan, ogpakaroromdom sikandan to duon mgo salo dan.
bonsaran
su tahan do no nandinog on sikandan tongod to pogtuu now. No ko ogpanumbaloy koy kandan, sikandan ka oghun-a ognangonnangon kanami tongod to pogpamminog now kanami. Woy ignangon dan to kono kow on og-ampu to mgo nig-ampuan now nokani no kono no magboboot, no ian su oyow ogpaagad-agaran now kun on ka tu-tuu ian no Magboboot no waro kamatayon din.
Duon mgo otow no pinohun-a ni Hisus dio to sagboka no lunsud dio to Probinsia to Samaria oyow ogpanagana ko ogdatong on woy sikandan.
Di ka soini no dakol no katouanan no ig-anad ku kaniu, ian ka dakol no katouanan to Magboboot, di dongan inholos din pad dio to mgo otow. Di agad to waro pad nohimu ka soini no tano, tahan din on tuuri to oyow ligkat to sikan no katouanan din, ogkapangabangan kinow to mgo salo ta oyow uromo ogkabogayan kinow on to karoyawon din.
nganga
Nò, nigtinawo ni Hisus ka bolad din no nigsamsam din ka lukos no nigkagi to, “Maroyow ku ian. Kabawian kad on to dalu nu.” Sikan do ian ka kagi ni Hisus no nabawian ka kogang to sikan no ibungon.
balagagag
Ko maponga rin to sikan no pananglitan, nigkagi si Hisus to “Duon talinga now, pamminog kow.”
dagdagow
Ka gotad, oggotgoton ta to ogtampod.
Og-alung ki to songo otow su warò ki mataga ko nokoy ka tu-ud din.
No to dio pad si Moisis to bubungan to Sinai, pigkagian dan si Aaron to, ‘Himui koy to mgo magboboot noy no ogdumoon noy su waro noy matagoi ko noomonu on si Moisis no nig-alap kanami no nigligkat to Ehipto.”
Ko kono now ogkoiniatan to ogkoumaan kow to iglogpad uromo, balbalawi now ka goinawa now woy himua now ka maroyow no batasan now no igpakita now to nabalbalawan on ka goinawa now. Ko kow ogsalig to goinawa now to nahan now no kono kow ogkalogparan su si Abraham ka minuna now. Ko og-awoson to Magboboot to duon apu ni Abraham ogkagian din do ka soin no mgo batu no ogpokohimu no mgo kapunganan ni Abraham,” kagi ni Huan.
Si Ipaparas, songo ogpangumusta kaniu. Duma now rod sikandin no taga Kulusas no suguanon ni Hisu Kristu. Ungod ogpoomot si Ipaparas to og-ampu kaniu. No ogbuyu to Magboboot oyow ogkohogot woy ogmasalig ka pogtuu now ki Hisu Kristu. Woy ogbuyu dod oyow waro igduwaruwa now ki Hisus ko ogpaagad-agad kow to tibo no koiniatan to Magboboot.
Ko ogpakapoid ki to musong, ogmo-itom ka lawa ta woy ka kinabò.
oli
To pogkaponga ni Hisus to pog-anad to soini tibo, nignangonan din ka mgo hibatoon din to,
Baluy no singgalung ka miow.
Di ka Magboboot atag, impapitow kanta ka dakol no goinawa rin, su agad maroot pad ka mgo batasan ta nokani, di nigpakimatoy si Kristu no ogtobus kanta.
Mgo sulod, og-awoson to ungod noy ogsayoon ka Magboboot tongod kaniu. Litos ian sikan su ogdakol on ka pogtuu now woy ogparakdakoloy kow to goinawa now to duma now no nigtuu.
Ogsamboy a to gabas nu su igtampod ku to kayu.
anunang
dingil
putung
Nò, niglibuwas ka namatoy no nabuhi on. Nabodboran pad agad ka bolad din, mgo ka paa rin to sikan no imbodbod dan dut namatoy woy duon dod paniu dut langlanguwan din. Kagi ni Hisus kuwo kandan, “Awaa now ka imbodbod kandin oyow ogpokouli dio to baloy rin.”
Duon ignangon ku kaniu tongod to mgo pinanganak ni Israil. No kono a og-uubat su sakup a ni Hisu Kristu, woy nataga a to kono no ubat ka ignangon ku su ka Gimukud to Magboboot ka ogmalogot to tu-tuu ian to dakol lagboy ka masakit to goinawa ku no kono ogkabulung su duon mgo duma ku no mgo Hudiu no kono ogtuu ki Hisus.
himasad
Omunaan no waro nigtuu kandin. Kagi ni Hisus kandan to, “Ka talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot, kono ogtahuron to mgo otow dio to kandin no lunsud. Di dio to duma no mgo lunsud ogtahuron sikandin to mgo otow.”
malogon so goinawa
Nigsayap ka bukod
sabinit
pilak
dangas
dangkias
timpongus
turuk
No pig-inso ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din to, “Nokoy buwa ka igpaap-apuloy now?”
Niggupal on woy nigtaladtalad dan on woy impa-abin dan ka ulu to nigbaba to sikan no babuy.
No nanhondio sikandan to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy ka mgo pogbuyagon to mgo Hudiu. No kagi ran to, “Nighogot ka goinawa noy lagboy su nangulibot koy to woy koy on ogkoon woy ko og–inum to agad nokoy ko ogkohimatayan noy on si Pablo.
singallow
pisang
nayò
Ka sikan no otow no og-aguantoon din ka igkabaybayari rin, ogbogayan to dakol no igkarago din. Ian su ko kono ogkaalap to sikan no igkabaybayari rin, ogkasayo sikandin no ogbogayan to pogkouyag din no waro katamanan. Sikan ka innangon to Magboboot no igbogoy rin to tibo no ogdakolon dan to goinawa ran kandin.
Pasapsapo-oy kid kunto-on. Konò ogpakitkito-oy.
tugdok
Ka allow, ogbogoy to layag to ma-awang.
tinga
To nig-uli on ka mgo otow no pinatagbu to kapitan ki Hisus no pogsolod dan to baloy rin, nigkita ran to nabawian on ka suguonon din.
Wangwangi on ka bulutut oyow og-uwang
Ko ogtalis ka to ig-ulì nu, og-iman-iman a to konò no malogot ka ignangon nu.
Kono man no ogkaayun to ogpitason to songo otow su ka Magboboot ka nigsagboka kandan.”
Ko ogko-opus ka sigariliu no ogkatutung, ogkaragdag ka alibu rin.
Sikan ian, agad to nataga kow on woy nohogot ka pogtuu now to tibo soini no ingkaanad ku kaniu no tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon, di malasi ku ro iparoromdom kaniu.
kalung
dugmun
tustus
“Ka allow to oglibong ka Kakoy to Koot-otawan, ka batasan to mgo otow, songo unawa ian to allow ni Noi dongan.
Igggagow ku to gutas ku no ogko-on to do-isok oyow igtaantan ka gutas ku.
Nigtabak si Hisus, “Sikan no mgo otow no dakol so goinawa ran koddi, ogtumanon dan ka ig-anad ku. Ko ogtumanon dan, dakol so goinawa to Amoy ku kandan. No, kanami no darua to Amoy ku, og-ugpo koy dio to kandan.
Nokogtampak ka susugkaloy su insumpul on.
tungug
Magaan on ogdatong ka allow no ogkoopus on ka tibo lagkos to pog-ugpo ta. Sikan ian no og-awoson to ogtantanuran ta ka mgo batasan ta woy ka doromdom ta oyow litos ka pog-ampu ta.
Nò, nigmoin-insooy on ka mgo hibatoon ni Hisus ko hontow buwa dapit kandan ka innangon ni Hisus no ogpanabod kandin.
lo-uy
to
Kono now igpoitaga to mgo duma to nigbulig kow. Ka amoy now ro no dio to langit ka ogkataga to sikan woy sikandin ka ogbogoy to igsayo kaniu.”
bokbok
songo...songo
Ko si Abiatal pad ka Labow to mgo talagpanubad, nigsolod to baloy to Magboboot woy si Dabid no nigkoon to paan no intubad to talagpanubad to Magboboot. Kagi to Balaod ta, ka mgo talagpanubad ro porom ka ogkoon to soin no paan di nigkoon ni Dabid woy nigtaaran din ka mgo duma din.”
Songo allow duon inso ni Hisus to, “Nokoy ka maroyow no igpananglitan ta to Pogsugu to Magboboot woy ko nokoy ka ogpounawaan ta?
Ko warò ig-ogot nu to duma nu, ogma-agkap ka pogdumaruma ta. Warò problima ta.
gusuk
Ligkat to kabogbogan ku, bawii now ka mgo otow to sikan no lunsud ko duon ogmandaralu. Nangnangoni now ka mgo otow to, ‘Marani on ka Pogsugu to Magboboot kaniu.’ ”
Sikan ian, ayad-ayad kow oyow kono kow ogkagawayan to agad hontow no ognangonnangon to nangnangonon no ogligkat to soini no kalibutan no ogkoiling to tu-tuu, dokad di ubat no waro pulus. Ka sikan no mgo nangnangonon, ogligkat do to doromdom to mgo otow woy ogligkat dod to mgo busow, kono no ligkat ki Kristu.
Ka mata ta” kagi ni Hisus, “sikan ka ilawan no igbat-ow to lawa ta. Ko waro dalu to mata ta songo maawang man ka ogkitoon ta. Di ko oglaburon ka mata nu, marusilom ka ogkitoon ta kai to lawa ta.
tobok
Ko ogsorop ki to sinoropan, du-on ilag to kohuna-an ta.
Songo ogpapangumustaan ku si Rupu. Noilaan sikandin no sakup to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta. Ogpapangumusta a to inoy ni Rupu no noiling ko songo inoy ku rod.
Noinuinu si Pilatu to ogdinog to namatoy on si Hisus. Impoumow rin ka sika igbuyag to mgo sundalu no nig-insaan din ko kon-u mamatoy si Hisus.
Ogkounawa ka igsumpalit to mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad mgo talag-anad to Balaod dan no mal-alukuyoy to, “Ogkabawian din ka duma no mgo otow di ka kandin no lawa kono din ogkabawian.
law-ag
Kagi ni Hisus kandin to, “Uli kad on, Usi, ogpakakita kad on su ka pogtuu nu koddi, sikan ian ka nakabawi koykow.” Sikan do no nakakita on woy nigduma ki Hisus.
Agad to waro ki makatuman to dongan no Balaod no nasulatan to mohon-ing no og-awoson no ogtumanon ta poron, di kono kid on ogkalogparan su ka pogkamatoy ni Hisu Kristu dio to krus ka imbalukas kanta. No kuntoon, ka ogpakamaroyow kanta dio to tangkaan to Magboboot, kono ogligkat to pogtuman ta to sikan no mgo Balaod songo no impasulat din dongan ki Moisis.
No ka sikan, duon mgo Hudiu no ogtahud to Magboboot no nan–ugpo dio to Hirusalim. Sikandan, nigligkat to agad hondoi no mgo ugpaan.
Di ko ogsilo ka allow no moinit on, nalonos to allow; nagangow on su waro mog-ugsob so dalig.
Di waro ogpakasolod to sikan no lunsud ka agad nokoy no ogpakaligsom. Waro agad hontow no oghimu to igkasipod ta woy ko og-uubat su ian do ogpakasolod ka mgo otow no ingkasulat ka ngaran dan dio to sikan no sulatanan to Nati no Karniru to ngaran to mgo otow no ogbogayan to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
Warò atag natagaan ku.
Ko nokoy ka ogbuyuon ta, ognanangon ki ko nokoy ka og-awoson ta to duma ta.
Di ian naan do atag kanta to ogkahallokan ta ka ogpokouma no logpad to Magboboot woy ka hapuy no ogliabliab no og-ubus to mgo otow no nig-atu kandin.
Pig-alam din pad si Hudas Iskarioti no ko ogkalugoy ian nigtabod ki Hisus.
Ka sikan no Balaod, nigpanultulisan on dio to manipis no batu. No to pogsulat, nalayagan on to Magboboot ka langlanguwan ni Moisis. Di agad to ogkasalinan on ka sikan no layag, ko diad on si Moisis to tangkaan to mgo otow no ian kaap-apuan ni Israil, kono ogpakapitow ka mgo otow kandin su ogsilangon to sikan no layag. Nò, agad to ligkat to sikan no Balaod, ogkalogparan ki poron to kamatayon no waro katamanan di dakol ka kabogbogan to sikan no Balaod.
ko hondo-i
Ka otow no du-on kuglung, nigkuò to bislig no intagpos to kuglung din.
ulib
Di sikanta atag, og-iman-iman kinow to sikan no innangon din kanta to oghimuon din ka iam no langit woy iam no tano. Waro maroot dio su ian do ogpokougpo dio ka oghimu to maroyow.
kaglung
Ka nigpanumbaloy ka diò ki Lillian, no-uma nu pad sikandin diò to baloy din, nabaloy nu pad.
Sopa-a nu ka bulung.
tumangì
sayap
Nò, nigmamundukpunduk on no ogpinnuu. Duon tag gatus no mgo otow woy duon tag kalimmaan no mgo otow to tag sagboka no punduk.
Duon hop-at no ilis to sikan no lunsud. No to tag sagboka no ilis din, duon tatolu no mgo gumawan. Tatolu ka dio to silaan, woy tatolu ka dio to salopan, woy tatolu ka dio to balabagan no diraya woy songo tatolu ka dio to dibabo.
Nignangonan ku sikaniu kuntoon no kai a pad to tano oyow ko ogkatuman on soini, ogtuu kow on.
Noiling soini ka pog-anak ki Hisu Kristu. Duon sagboka no lukos no oghingaranan ki Husi no og-asawoon din si Maria. Di to waro pad sikandan nakasal, natagaan ni Maria no ogkaboros sikandin pinabayo to kabogbogan to Gimukud to Magboboot.
Ian su ko ogkoumaan kow to sikan no mgo allow, mapoit lagboy ka igkabaybayari now. Waro no ogpokounawa kai to soi kalibutan puun to poghimu to Magboboot to kalibutan taman to kuntoon. Agad ko ogkaponga, konad on ogpokounawa agad kon-u.
konò
Uroikon ki to subung to Liboganon.
Niglanog on so-in woig.
Ko’gbitbiton ku ka laku dio’t kamot, kagi ni Amonggoy, “Kò nu’gtalo-i to sika laku, ogkamatoy ka homoy, ogtala-an to laku.”
unus
Ka otow no warò goinawa rin to duma rin, ogkoison din.
usung
Nò, ligkat to waro nigpaagad-agad ka mgo Hudiu su waro mogtuu, nohimu on no dalan to oyow ogkakohoy-uan ka agad hondoi no mgo otow kai to ampow to kalibutan. Woy ligkat dod to naawo pad ka pogkohoy-u to Magboboot to mgo Hudiu, dakol ka pogkohoy-u rin to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu. Nò, su tu-tuu ian ka sikan, dakoldakol pad man do ka karoyawon no igkabogoy dio to mgo otow no kono no Hudiu no ogtuu ko uromo oglibong ka mgo Hudiu no ogtuu on sikandan to Magboboot.
ganò
Ian su si Adan ka pighun-a pamulinga to Magboboot woy rin atag si Eba,
Nigparagas nigkagi si Hisus. Kagi rin, “Ogkounawa soini no pananglitan ka Pogsugu to Magboboot ko oglibong ka Kakoy to mgo Koot-otawan. Duon sampulu no mgo dalaga no nig-alap dan ka mgo ilawan dan no oghondio oyow ogtagbu to songo ogpangasawa.
Kagi ni Hisus kandan, “Manio to ogkokohirogo kow? Onow kow on woy ampu kow to oyow kono kow ogkaroog ko og-ol-ologan kow ni Satanas.”
halomhom
hogod
Sikan ian, mgo sulod, og-ayad-ayad ki to mgo batasan ta oyow ogkounawa ki to mgo otow no duon katagaanan. No kono kid ogkoiling to mgo otow no waro katagaanan to sikan no tu-tuu ian no nangnangonon tongod ki Hisus.
Pigkitkit ni Hisus ka bolad to sikan no nabutud woy pigduma rin dio to libuwasan to lunsud. Ko nig-iloban ni Hisus ka mata to nabutud woy ko nigsamsam din ka mata, nig-inso din kandin to “Duon on ogkitoon nu?”
Ogkohonat ka tibò no oghalin su du-on igkahallok.
Ian su, ligkat do to pogtuu ta ki Kristu, nohimu kinow on no anak to Magboboot.
hibi
Nigparagas to, “Og-awoson ta to ogpakasabuk kandin to taliwaro to pusung ta woy to tiboon ta ka doromdom ta kandin woy to ogtiboon ta ka dayagang ta to ogtuman no insugu din kanta to dakol ka goinawa ta kandin. Agad og-awos to ogpounawoon ta to goinawa ta to mgo duma ta to goinawa ta to kantan lawa. Madmaroyow ka pogtuman ta to soin no darua no sugu to oghalaran ta ka ayam, mgo dangob no igtubad ta dio to Magboboot.”
Ian su ogluyud ka mgo otow no mohon–ing no ogbabansagon to, “Himatayi now on.”
Di nakasabut si Hisus to maroot no tuud dan to oggawayan sikandin pinabayo to igtabak din kandan.
No ka sikan no mgo Hudiu, pinanganak dod sikandan to mgo kaap-apuan noy. No ko tongod to pogkootow ni Hisus kai to tano, sikandin ka oghingaranan ta ki Kristu no ian Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan. Woy pinanganak dod si Hisus to mgo kaap-apuan dan. Ka Magboboot no oglabow to tibo, ogsayoon ta to waro katamanan.
hantal
Ulì a ian porom dio’t Maguimon, di konò ad man.
Ka anak to mgo kamolung, alibutod, katod, langgi-on.
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Duon nasulat to Tahan no Kasulatan ta ka kagi to Magboboot bahin to mgo igbuyag ta dongan no nigkagi to, ‘Mgo magboboot kow.’
Sikan ian, ka mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu no og-unug to sikan no mgo Balaod dio to sikan no tagooran no ampuanan dan, waro labot dan to soini no karoyawon no ogligkat to ingkatubad ni Hisus no ogpakaawo to mgo salo ta.
To diad on to Babilonia ka mgo matig Israil, duon anak ni Joaquin no si Salatiel. Si Salatiel amoy ni Sirobabil.
Kagi rin to, “Songo isulat nu ka soini no ipaalap nu dio to suguanon to Magboboot no ogtanudtanud to mgo otow no nigtuu to Magboboot no dio to lunsud to Ismirna. No soini ka igsulat nu, ‘Sikanak ka kabinunsuran woy ka katamanan. Namatoy ad nokani no nouyag ad on taman to waro katamanan.
Ogbantoy ki woy og ayad-ayad ki su ka usig ta no si Satanas, og-ol-olog ogpasalo kanta. No ian din ogkounawaan ka lion no oghanggol woy ogpalibutlibut no ogpamangho to ogpamuoron din.
Nigtakow to ubal ka susì.
Nigparagas si Hisus nigkagi to, “Ka ignangon ku kaniu, agad kon-u, waro otow kai to tano no labow pad ki Huan. Dokad di, sikan no otow no doisok do ka katondanan din di sakup sikandin to Pogsugu to Magboboot, labow pad sikandin ki Huan.” kagi ni Hisus.
Ko ogbabalun ki diò to pantad, ogsabukan to bayokbok oyow ogkasalà ka mgo lagut.
talad
gapun
Nigsundulsundul si Pedro ki Hisus no nigsolod dio to naalad no lama to baloy to Labow to mgo talagpanubad. Nig-amut si Pedro to mgo talagbantoy no songo nigpinnuu no oghinarang dio to hapuy ran.
Nò, to nalibulung on ka mgo Parisiu, nig-inso si Hisus kandan, kagi,
Malogot ka ignangon ku kaniu, to sikaniu no mgo otow kuntoon ka oglogparan to soin tibo no mgo pogpanghimatoy.
kalatkat
Nò, su duon man kabogbogan to sikan no Balaod no ogpakabogoy kanta to logpad, ogkatagaan ta to dakoldakol lagboy ka kabogbogan to sikan no dalan no ogpokohimu kanta no maroyow dio to tangkaan to Magboboot.
Ko mgo batò koy pad, ogdogpak koy to batu diò to doipag to woig ko hontow ka ma-agbot to pogtugdò.
bolobog
To pog-ampu ni Hisus, nahalin on ka langlanguwan din, no ka sabinit din, lagboy no malayag woy lagboy no maputi no nanilaksilak no ogpamalusigsig.
Sugba-a nu ka homoy su baawon ta.
batò
Di kono ki ogpamminog to sikan oyow kono ki ogkoubatan. Ian su tu-tuu ian ka soini no kinagian: “Ko ogdumaruma ki to mgo otow no maroot so batasan, mangkuwan, songo ogkounug ta.”
Pogkapawo, nigduung koy on dio to lunsud to Sidon. Nohoy–uan ni Huliu si Pablo su nigbogoy on kandin to liwak to ogpanumbaloy dio to mgo alukuy rin dio to lunsud oyow ogkabogayan sikandin to mgo awosonon din.
Ian su waro pulus ko natuli ki woy ko waro. Ian ta ro og-awoson ko ogpaagad-agad ki to mgo innangon to Magboboot.
Sikan ian no niglimud ni Dimitriu ka mgo talagbulig kandin woy ka duma no mgo talagsalsal. Kagi rin to, “Mgo sulod, natagaan now ka soini no hulingon ta to ian ka igpanalapi ta.
Ko du-on asawa woy ko dalaga, tibò din og-aligon.
Olog bua ko ogpakasamboy a to kuddò nu su oghondiò a to Patil su ogboli a to tambal.
Nò mgo sulod ku no indakoli kud ian to goinawa, kono kow ogpagawoy to goinawa now.
Tibo no mgo sakup, koykow ka tagtuun kandan, songo koddi ka tagtuun to tibo; sikandan tibo, salupungan ta sikandan. Woy ogsayoon a pinabayo kandan.
Ian so ligkat to innangon to Magboboot woy ka pog-ampu ta, ogdoromdomon ta no ka tibo no ogkakoon ta, maroyow on.
baloy
Ka mgo sundalu no nigbantoy, nahallok lagboy sikandan. Nigkolkol sikandan woy inat to namatoy sikandan.
sulì
kobbiung
hulid
goban
Tag sagboka kaniu, ko duon talinga now, og-awoson to ogpamminog kow to ignangon to Gimukud to Magboboot dio to mgo nigtuu kandin.’ ”
lawag
Isabuk now sikandin dio to taliwaro to mgo pusung now; tibaa now ka doromdom now dio to Magboboot ta, woy tibaa now ka dayagang now oyow ogkatuman to insugu kandin puun to dakol so goinawa nu kandin.’
li-ag
Pinabayo to soini natuman ka innangon dongan ni Hirimias no talagnangon to kagi to Magboboot no kagi ni Hirimias to,
bungagn
Sikan ian, ka sikan no otow no nahan din no dakol ka pogtuu rin, og-awoson din to ogdoroyow oyow kono ogpakasalo sikandin.
Ko malayat ka pog-ugpò nu, sikan ka agpot su nig-amut ka.
tongà
tinapuri
kisak
Nanong-ow a diò to Liboganon to subuk
logoron
ayam
No su ian ian, og-aguantoon ku ro ka agad nokoy no igkabaybayari ku to oyow, ka mgo otow no nig-abin to Magboboot, ogkabogayan to kouyagan no waro katamanan su ogkasagboka ro sikandan ki Hisu Kristu no ogkabogayan on sikandan to karoyawon no pog-ugpo no waro kataman.
Nigtabak ni Hisus to, “Soini ka labow no sugu. ‘Pamminog kow, mgo pinanganak ni Israil, sagboka ro ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no ian ka Magboboot ta.
gitas
Nigligkat si Hisus to sikan no ugpaan no nig-uli dio to kandin no lunsud no nigduma ka mgo hibatoon din.
sukut
Mgo sulod, ogkoiniatan ku to oyow ogkatagaan now to, ka soini no igkabaybayari ku, nakabulig to pogkatangkap to soini no Maroyow no Nangnangonon
Sikan ian to, nataga ki to duon dod himolayan no igbogoy to Magboboot dio to mgo otow no ogpasakup kandin. No ka sikan, ogkounawa rod to sikan no himolayan to Magboboot dongan to sikan no igkapapitu no allow ko napongaan din on ka tibo no nighimu rin.
Allow no nigligad to gabi-i no allow.
Pogdinog to mgo talagsalsal to kagi ni Dimitriu, nabolu on ian lagboy. Nigbabansagon sikandan to, “Mabogbog si Diana no ian magboboot to mgo taga Episu.”
gimuat
bul-uy
Nigkagian to tagtuun ka talagbantoy to pinamula rin to, ‘Pitow ka,’ kagi, ‘tatolu on no tuid no ungod ku liblibongi ka soini no kayu ko duon bogas din, di waro man bogas. Polora nud on soini su naraat do ka tabo to tano su kono ogbogas.’
Ko ogmalunoy on, konò ogkaligtù.
Di ka maroot no oghimuon to sikan no otow no talaglop-ang to Balaod, nigbunsud on no ogkatuman, di ogpokoholos pad taman to ogkaawo on ka ogpakaatang to igpapayag din to kandin no ngaran.
Ko oghillop ka ulu to bo-u-u, og-itu-os woy ogtagù to lawa rin.
luat
Ogkatopangon ka mgo otow
Sapsapan noy on ka luyung oyow ogmanipis
Nò,” kagi ni Hisus, “Ko ogkitoon nud on ka karniru nu, ogpuruton nud woy kai nud isabuk to pamanayon nu ko og-uli ka su dakol ian ka igkarago nu to nigkita nud on ka ayam nu.
waswas
Nigkagi sikandin to “Dakol ka oggaanion porom di ka mgo oggaani, manalingboka ro. Ampu kow to Magboboot oyow ogsugu sikandin to mgo oggaani dio to kandin no kamot.”
kolong
Nigtabak si Hisus kandan to, “Ka mgo otow no ogpamminog woy ogtuman to kagi to Magboboot, sikandan ka ogkounawa to inoy ku woy mgo hari ku,” kagi ni Hisus.
Ka ulod no ogtagù to lugì, songo oghillop dod.
tu-ud
Kagi rin kandan to, “Nakasalo a su inpanabod ku ka otow no waro salo no ogpohimatayan sikandin.” Nigtabak sikandan to, “Waro labot noy to sikan. Koykow on no igkasasow.”
Nò, sikantanow, ko kono kid ogsagman to soini kuntoon no dakol no pogpangabang kanta to mgo salo ta, kono ki ogpakasasalia to iglogpad din kanta. Ian su ka Lagboy no Igbuyag ta no si Hisus ka nokohun-a no nignangon to soini no nangnangonon. No ka mgo nigdinog kandin, sikandan ka nigpamalogot kanta to tu-tuu ian ka sikan no innangon din.
logoylogoy
Kagi ni Hisus, “Ogtabak buwa ka amigu nu to, ‘kono a nu ogsasawa su niglokoban kud on woy nighibat koy on. Ka mgo anak ku, nighulid koddi, no ko nokoy ka ogbuyuon nu dii to koddi, kono a ogkaayun og-onow no ogbogoy koykow.’ ”
Ko waro nigboot to Magboboot to ogpamalopotan ka mgo allow, ogkoubus ogkamatoy ka mgo otow to sika mgo igkabaybayari. Di nigboot dod to ogpamalopotan din su nohoy-u kandin ka mgo sakup din no nig-alam din.
kagi
atolug
Pogkaponga, nigtorongan ni Pablo sikandan to bolad din to pog–ampu no nigbogayan sikandan to Gimukud to Magboboot, no nigkakagi on to mgo kinagian no waro dan masabuti woy innangonnangon dan on ka kinagian to Magboboot.
lubug
Oghonduonon sikandan to dakol ka ogkatouanan dan. Dokad di, nohimu on sikandan to otow no naangol-angol.
No agad hondoi ogpakabayo sikandan, dakol ka ogkaraat dan, woy mohon-ing ka ogkagalat dan no igkabaybayari.
konsong
Ogkoiniatan ku to oyow waro porom igkasasow now to soini no pog-ugpo now. Ian su ka balubato, ogpakasagman to igpatuman din no igkarago to Lagboy no Igbuyag ta.
Ka igkatatolu nighutuk nigkagian ni Pilatu ka mgo otow to, “Manio? Nokoy ka salo din? Waro man ogkitoon ku no salo no litos to igkamatoy rin. Sikan ian no ogpabarasan ku ro sikandin woy ku igpalibuwas.”
bangkalow
dakol
Di waro moghoo si Pablo su ogkoiniatan din to ian ogboboot kandin ka Labow no Igbuyag ta no si Sisar. No innangon din to ogpabantayan ku pad sikandin kai tagood to igpahatod ku sikandin dio to Ruma,” kagi ni Pistu. “No sikan ian to nigsugu a ro to ogpabantayan pad si Pablo to sundalu tagood to duon ogkohimu ku oyow igpaalap ku sikandin dio ki Igbuyag Sisar.” Sikan pad ian ka kagi ni Pistu ki Agripa.
Balo-i ku.
Ka Magboboot, ungod ogtimul to kaniu no pog-ugpo to agad nokoy no allow, oyow mabogoybogoy kow to mgo otow no duon og-awoson dan. No ligkat to sikan, mohon-ing ka ogpakapasalamat kandin ko ogpakapurut sikandan to sikan no igpaalap now kanami no igpabulig now kandan.
bot-os
Nò, indogpak ni Hudas ka salapi dio to soog to Dakol no Ampuanan woy nighipanow no nig-ogot sikandin; nigbitin din ka lawa din.
su mohon-ing no mgo Hudiu, pig-iniugan dan on ka sikan no mgo igbuyag dan no nigtuu on ki Hisus su nigkita ran si Lasaru no nouyag on.
Waro goinawa ni Hudas to mgo publi. Ian do duon ka kagi rin su kandin ka talagtalipun to salapi woy malasi rin puruta ka salapi no litos to kandin no igkoiniat.
No nigkagi si Hisus to pananglitan din to, “Duon sagboka no datu no nigtuga ka mgo pinamula rin dio to tano din.
dugnal
Nò, nigdakop dan on si Hisus no nig-alap dan sikandin dio to baloy Labow to mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu. Si Pedro, nigsundulsundul ki Hisus di mariu do.
Woy kono tanow ogkalingawan to oghimu to maroyow woy to ogmabulbuligoy ki su ka soini songo igpanubad ta dio to Magboboot no igkarago din ian.
gingow
dolog
kulung
No ogkohimu to Magboboot no igbogoy rin kanta ka tibo no og-awoson ta. Di ka igbogoy rin, ungod din ogpasublaan to og-awoson ta to oyow duon dod litos to igbulig ta to duma ta ko duon og-awoson dan.
kapot
bus-ug
ligu
“Buyag,” kagi ni Pedro, “hugasi nu agad ka bolad ku, mgo ulu ku. Kono no paa ku ro.”
Nigpohimatayan now on ian si Hisus su impalansang now dio to krus sikandin. Di ka Magboboot no ian Magboboot to mgo kaap–apuan ta dongan, sikandin ka nig–uyag ki Hisus.
pakpak
Ian su ogtantanuran to Magboboot ka mgo otow no oghimu to maroyow woy ogpamminogan din ka pog-ampu dan. Di og-iniugan din ka mgo otow no oghimu to maroot.” Sikan ka nangon to Magboboot.
Di ko nigkita ni Hisus to nigsaparan dan ka nigduma to mgo bato, nabou on no kagi rin kandan, “Kono now sapari. Pohondinia now koddi ka mgo bato; ko now atangi su ogkounawa ka mgo otow no ogpakaamut to Pogsugu to Magboboot to soi mgo bato no maboot to duma ran.
Nokani no waro pad nokohondio si Titu to kaniu, impanoy ku imparakoldakol sikaniu dio to kandin. No waro a masipod su tu-tuu ian ka ingkanangon ku kandin su ka tibo no nohimu, ingkamalogot on ian to sikan no ingkanangon ku.
No to sikan dod no marusilom, nighinggat to talagbantoy woy si Pablo dio to woig no niglinisan din on ka mgo pali dan. Pogkaponga, nigpabautismu on sikandin woy ka tibo no otow no nig–ugpo to baloy rin su songo nigtuu on.
sinakot
Nigtabak si Simon Pedro no kagi rin to, “Sikoykow ian ka Kristu no Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan to Igbuyag noy uromo. Sikoykow ka anak to Magboboot no kono ogkamatoy.”
Di kuntoon, naawo kow on to pogkouripon now to mgo salo, woy nohimu kow on no uripon to Magboboot. No ka pulus kaniu to sikan su ka tibo no batasan ta, ogkaayun on to goinawa to Magboboot woy ogbogayan kinow on to kouyagan no waro katamanan.
os-os
Logoron ka sikan no boi no warò din bogayi ka sungkud din to agad do-isok no homoy.
palì
ligbos
logsad ka kai to tano oyow kono ka ogkamatoy.”
tigaworon
Nigbogayan kud sikandan to unawa no katondanan to imbogoy nud koddi oyow ogkasalupung do sikandan su unawa koykow woy koddi, nasalupung ki ro.
batang
Nò atui now sikandin woy hogota now lagboy ka pogtuu now ki Hisus. Ian su nataga ki, tongod to mgo duma ta no ogtuu dio to agad hondoi kai to kalibutan, to songo ogpakaaguanta sikandan to igkabaybayari ran no ogkounawa rod to kaniu no igkabaybayari.
laging
Nò, nabolu ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad woy to mgo talag-anad to Balaod to nigkita ran ka tibo no koin-inuan no nighimu ni Hisus woy to nigdinog dan ka mgo bato no ogpaagbotan dan ka pogsayo dan dio to Dakol no Ampuanan no kagi ran to, ‘Ogsayoon tanow ka pinanganak ni Dabid.’
banta-an
No ka tuud din to nighimu ka sikan, su oyow taman to kalugoy, igpohitaga rin to mgo otow ka dakol lagboy no pogkohoy-u rin woy ka dakol no goinawa rin kanta su nighimu kinow rin on no nasagboka ki Hisu Kristu.
bantug
Di nigtabak ka busow to, “Ogtokoron ku si Hisus woy ogtokod a ki Pablo. Di sikaniu atag, waro a mogtokod to duon katondanan now,” kagi to busow.
lupit
Kunto-on pad.
Pogdinog to mgo otow to kagi ni Huan, pigtimulan dan ka pog-iman-iman dan no nanumansuman sikandan ko si Huan buwa ka Im-imanan to mgo Koot-otawan.
lumut
batun
tambanusuk
linas
Ka otow dongan, konò ogkali-ag su maga-an ogbobonal no ogbuyù to dakol no ighusoy.
Nigbogayan ku sikandin to mgo allow no igliwak to ogbalbalawan ka goinawa rin, di kono din man og-ongkoran ka mgo maroot no batasan din.
Si Barabas, ian napirisu su nokani nighimu to dakol no samuk dio to songo lunsud no nigpaatu rin ka mgo otow to gobirnu woy nighimatayan din ka otow.
Ian su dakol ka igkoiniat ku to oyow ogkitoon ku sikaniu, oyow duon igkabogoy ku kaniu ligkat to Gimukud to Magboboot no ogpokohogot to pogtuu now.
ulat
Warò ogkasau-ut no oghun-a....ogkatibulus ka mgo otow.
No nigtabak a ki Hisus to, ‘Nokoy ka oghimuon ku, Buyag?’ Kagi to Lagboy no Igbuyag kanak to, ‘Sasindog ka no hondio kad on to lunsud to Damasku, no duon ka ognangon koykow to tibo no nigbobootan to Magboboot no igpohimu rin koykow.’
Nigtangko si Hisus ki Pedro no kagi rin ki Pedro to, “Awo ka kai to longod ku. Ogkounawa ka kagi nu to kagi ni Satanas no ogpakabalabag to koddi no dalan su, waro mogpuun to Magboboot ka pogdoromdom nu; nigpuun do to goinawa to mgo kootawan.”
Songo kuwo buwa ko duon otow no ogkagi to, “Ka batasan ku to og-uubat, ko igpanag-ilingan tad to batasan to Magboboot no ogkagi to tu-tuu ro, ogkasayo sikandin su maroyow ka kandin no batasan. Sikan ian, kono a poron ogkalogparan to Magboboot woy kono a poron oghingaranan no makasasalo ko og-uubat a su nokoy naan to ogkasayo sikandin su ligkat to sikan ka batasan ku,” kagi to sikan no mgo otow.
topang
Nig-umow ni Hisus ka mgo hibatoon din no kagi rin to, “Kohoy-uan ku ka soini no mgo otow su tatolu on no allow ran dini to koddi no warad on ka boow ran. Kono no maroyow ko ogpoulion ku sikandan ko kono ku ogpakoonon kandan su ogkabigtawan buwa sikandan dio to dalan.”
Ka boi no ogpangiram, ko warò ogkako-on din no ogko-ibogan din, ogkabongkag ka batò su ogka-awa-an on.
niug
No nigkagian ni Pilatu ka mgo igbuyag to mgo talagpanubad to mgo Hudiu woy to mgo otow no mohon-ing. Kagi rin, “Wa ku nakitoi ka agad nokoy no maroot no hinimuan to soini no otow.”
Ko hontow ka og-aguanta to ogduma, kandin ka ogka-alam.
Woy nu ogkapurut [ka kuddò] ko du-on on ka ig-indan no oghimu to sabut ko kon-u ka ogkatibò on ka igbayad.
kilos
Pakaponù ki to ogga-ani.
tayurak
Ko-unus so goinawa
mata
Ogpaka-aligu si Mery ka oghondiò to iskuilaan su warò bot-os no dalan kai to marani.
