hurry
but if your eyes are unhealthy, your whole body will be full of darkness. if then the light within you is darkness, how great is that darkness!
it's noon
make every effort to keep the unity of the spirit through the bond of peace.
ballad or chanting syle of song.
or is god the god of jews only? is he not the god of gentiles too? yes, of gentiles too,
one god and father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.
to harvest rice
all the people were astonished and said, “could this be the son of david?”
so when we could stand it no longer, we thought it best to be left by ourselves in athens.
cook
any fruit or vegetable blossom.
and asked them, “did you receive the holy spirit when you believed?” they answered, “no, we have not even heard that there is a holy spirit.”
forgive
“now that you know these things, you will be blessed if you do them.”
it is like a mustard seed, which a man took and planted in his garden. it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the air perched in its branches."
to hire someone to take harvest downriver
hurry up and take it to its owner. we have them hurry to have it taken to its owner.
the foolish ones took their lamps but did not take any oil with them.
hummingbird
mutter under one's breath, grumble
delicious.
they devour widows' houses and for a show make lengthy prayers. such men will be punished most severely."
i crush the lice between my fingernails.
whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
slice thinly
therefore, if you have disputes about such matters, do you ask for a ruling from those whose way of life is scorned in the church?
[they] are fetching camotes from others.
knowledge
acknowledge
by faith the walls of jericho fell, after the people had marched around them for seven days.
surround, as with a fence
if they had been thinking of the country they had left, they would have had opportunity to return.
be diligent in these matters; give yourself wholly to them, so that everyone may see your progress.
type of sugarcane.
one of those days jesus went out to a mountainside to pray, and spent the night praying to god.
the pharisees said to him, "look, why are they doing what is unlawful on the sabbath?"
lightheaded
when the intensity of the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the pain.
stop bleeding
immediately he stood up in front of them, took what he had been lying on and went home praising god.
to lay in wait to ambush a person.
but god raised him from the dead, freeing him from the agony of death, because it was impossible for death to keep its hold on him.
but when the kindness and love of god our savior appeared,
be deprived of something
to become flavorful
it's like a man going away: he leaves his house and puts his servants in charge, each with his assigned task, and tells the one at the door to keep watch.
household knife
feathery hair of bamboo
the person who is emaciated has hardly any flesh left on his or her body.
one's stomach to feel uncomfortable
whenever
then the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared to sound them.
if he called them 'gods,' to whom the word of god came--and the scripture cannot be broken--
“but very truly i tell you, it is for your good that i am going away. unless i go away, the advocate will not come to you; but if i go, i will send him to you.”
to timothy my true son in the faith: grace, mercy and peace from god the father and christ jesus our lord.
tell things about your living situation.
a kind of spear
agot-ot soil is red and gooey. it is used to make clay pots.
(this was before john was put in prison.)
minor may arrive at the same time the plane does.
the other places which have been reached by the sun have nothing to eat because their ground is dry.
you take heed when you are corrected.
and he did not do many miracles there because of their lack of faith.
male piglet
which said: “write on a scroll what you see and send it to the seven churches: to ephesus, smyrna, pergamum, thyatira, sardis, philadelphia and laodicea.”
if anyone asks you, 'why are you doing this?' tell him, 'the lord needs it and will send it back here shortly.' "
so we see that they were not able to enter, because of their unbelief.
cooked food softened by boiling, like mature corn or beans
praise
roll eyes, cross-eyed
when many children are playing, they move about in all directions as they don't stay in one place. they are going in different directions.
when jesus came into peter’s house, he saw peter’s mother-in-law lying in bed with a fever.
aware of their discussion, jesus asked, “you of little faith, why are you talking among yourselves about having no bread?
jesus answered, “i am the way and the truth and the life. no one comes to the father except through me.”
while jesus was in one of the towns, a man came along who was covered with leprosy. when he saw jesus, he fell with his face to the ground and begged him, “lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean.”
when the leftover section [is harvested] there will be just one basketful left .
to cut in half
whole group
laugh unrestrainably with each other
put
offspring of a large animal
latch onto
and what we have said is even more clear if another priest like melchizedek appears,
i tell you, among those born of women there is no one greater than john; yet the one who is least in the kingdom of god is greater than he.”
to this end i labor, struggling with all his energy, which so powerfully works in me.
he taught them many things by parables, and in his teaching said:
buling twitches in her sleep.
put someone in front
an image
brass lime container
by this time it was late in the day, so his disciples came to him. "this is a remote place," they said, "and it's already very late.
“surely not, lord!” peter replied. “i have never eaten anything impure or unclean.”
brothers, pray for us
if the baby in the abdomen has been properly positioned ahead of time, the mother will have it easier when she gives birth.
near the cross of jesus stood his mother, his mother's sister, mary the wife of clopas, and mary magdalene.
you used to walk in these ways, in the life you once lived.
later jesus appeared to the eleven as they were eating; he rebuked them for their lack of faith and their stubborn refusal to believe those who had seen him after he had risen.
so...after all
those who mourn, as if they did not; those who are happy, as if they were not; those who buy something, as if it were not theirs to keep;
in the same way, he sprinkled with the blood both the tabernacle and everything used in its ceremonies.
then he went up and touched the bier they were carrying him on, and the bearers stood still. he said, “young man, i say to you, get up!”
now to the one who works, wages are not credited as a gift but as an obligation.
mary magdalene and mary the mother of joses saw where he was laid.
crippled, as of hand
now as the church submits to christ, so also wives should submit to their husbands in everything.
those were the animals god forbade them to eat.
and in fact, you do love all the brothers throughout macedonia. yet we urge you, brothers, to do so more and more
if anyone causes one of these little ones—those who believe in me—to stumble, it would be better for them to have a large millstone hung around their neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea.

to begin something (field, speech, weeding, sowing)
the stars will fall from the sky, and the heavenly bodies will be shaken.'
at this, she turned around and saw jesus standing there, but she did not realize that it was jesus.
they were amazed at his teaching, because his words had authority.
large
just before dawn paul urged them all to eat. "for the last fourteen days," he said, "you have been in constant suspense and have gone without food-- you haven't eaten anything.
this is the covenant i will make with the house of israel after that time, declares the lord. i will put my laws in their minds and write them on their hearts. i will be their god, and they will be my people.
i have spoken to you of earthly things and you do not believe; how then will you believe if i speak of heavenly things?
as for you, the anointing you received from him remains in you, and you do not need anyone to teach you. but as his anointing teaches you about all things and as that anointing is real, not counterfeit--just as it has taught you, remain in him.
bar handle
to be orphaned by at least one parent
field used for rice, then camotes, then left idle
woven container
fork
“lord, they have killed your prophets and torn down your altars; i am the only one left, and they are trying to kill me”?
at this, some of his disciples said to one another, “what does he mean by saying, ‘in a little while you will see me no more, and then after a little while you will see me,’ and ‘because i am going to the father’?”
then the father went to the other son and said the same thing. he answered, ‘i will, sir,’ but he did not go.
some of the jews were persuaded and joined paul and silas, as did a large number of god-fearing greeks and quite a few prominent women.
people who say such things show that they are looking for a country of their own.
ugly
they were all filled with awe and praised god. “a great prophet has appeared among us,” they said. “god has come to help his people.”
so they took away the stone. then jesus looked up and said, "father, i thank you that you have heard me.
judas and silas, who themselves were prophets, said much to encourage and strengthen the believers.
something stored up as valuable to that person; a treasure or a keepsake.
the person who danced to the kuglung instrument was turning from side to side as he/she was dancing.
younger (adjective)
"behold, i am coming soon! blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy in this book."
new moon phase.
sprout
to make] inagkud, we get corn, rice or some other [ingredient] which is mixed together as ingredients.
but i tell you that everyone will have to give account on the day of judgment for every empty word they have spoken.
greedy
when they heard this, they were amazed. so they left him and went away.
it is difficult for a person to cross the swift bubbly current of a river.
converse as to ask each other questions about family.
he/she is the parent of my child's spouse.
near the hearer
finally pilate handed him over to them to be crucified. so the soldiers took charge of jesus.
the person who has harvested rice, he will cover it with leaves so that it will not be rained on.  he is protecting it so that the rice will not sprout.
live bird used as lure
don't have anything to do with foolish and stupid arguments, because you know they produce quarrels.
“so he left the land of the chaldeans and settled in harran. after the death of his father, god sent him to this land where you are now living.
bulisung is a cliff in which a hole has been formed at the base which has a deep area containing a whirlpool.
do not be afraid of what you are about to suffer. i tell you, the devil will put some of you in prison to test you, and you will suffer persecution for ten days. be faithful, even to the point of death, and i will give you the crown of life
the lord answered, "who then is the faithful and wise manager, whom the master puts in charge of his servants to give them their food allowance at the proper time?
poke the eyes
so they shook the dust off their feet as a warning to them and went to iconium.
it was now about the sixth hour, and darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour,
as for a person who eats a lot, someone would say, "this person is too much who has nothing else to do than to be always eating.
to arise
in the same way, the lord has commanded that those who preach the gospel should receive their living from the gospel.
have sexual relations
greedily and repeatedly stuff one’s mouth with food
for we know him who said, "it is mine to avenge; i will repay," and again, "the lord will judge his people."
he sent them to the lord to ask, “are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?”
"so i say to you: ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you.
dam up
that clay soil is red and malleable. it is used to make clay pots.
charge
these, then, are the things you should teach. encourage and rebuke with all authority. do not let anyone despise you.
donghuan was scared to death because he was thinking, “i will probably be eaten by this big python.”
immerse in water
a kind of large white camote with firm texture.
there
rise
which is easier: to say, ‘your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘get up and walk’?
through him you believe in god, who raised him from the dead and glorified him, and so your faith and hope are in god.
shame on you who leave your companions behind.
then i saw three impure spirits that looked like frogs; they came out of the mouth of the dragon, out of the mouth of the beast and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
to ask him, “are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?”
to be physically difficult (like digging hard soil)
sugarcane having a greyish pattern.
i thank christ jesus our lord, who has given me strength, that he considered me trustworthy, appointing me to his service.
to have gone, or to have left for home
therefore i tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer, believe that you have received it, and it will be yours.
slash with a bolo
however, still; whenever
and how from infancy you have known the holy scriptures, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in christ jesus.
item of clothing (shirt, pants, dress)
camote.
lift up one hand
when peter saw him, he asked, "lord, what about him?"
kitchen.
follow closely, walk single file
when he arrived at the other side in the region of the gadarenes, two demon-possessed men coming from the tombs met him. they were so violent that no one could pass that way.
they are from the world and therefore speak from the viewpoint of the world, and the world listens to them.
do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit. rather, in humility value others above yourselves,
moonless
but they remained silent. so taking hold of the man, he healed him and sent him away.
approach
you gladly put up with fools since you are so wise!
so be on your guard! remember that for three years i never stopped warning each of you night and day with tears.
so you testify against yourselves that you are the descendants of those who murdered the prophets.
if what he has built survives, he will receive his reward.
mercy, peace and love be yours in abundance.
the goal of this command is love, which comes from a pure heart and a good conscience and a sincere faith.
when i broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many basketfuls of pieces did you pick up?" "twelve," they replied.
then he gave abraham the covenant of circumcision. and abraham became the father of isaac and circumcised him eight days after his birth. later isaac became the father of jacob, and jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs.
to be strong-willed or disobedient.
so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed. and a sword will pierce your own soul too.”
an edible, large leafed plant with tuberous roots; taro, a plant similar to gabi.
‘we played the pipe for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not mourn.’
the lasangan fungus which grows where it is damp which is like the kolop fungus, it also shines because it has phosphorescence.
bit for horse’s mouth
so he came down at once and welcomed him gladly.
but if anyone obeys his word, god's love is truly made complete in him. this is how we know we are in him:
the burrows of the marmots mound are connected underneath to the places where they make their nests.
some pharisees came to him to test him. they asked, “is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any and every reason?”
truly i tell you, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.
trash, debris
we do not want you to become lazy, but to imitate those who through faith and patience inherit what has been promised.
in the past god overlooked such ignorance, but now he commands all people everywhere to repent.
the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you.
we press and rub the sharpening stone against the bolo, axe, or knife in order to sharpen its edge.
“right then three men who had been sent to me from caesarea stopped at the house where i was staying.
on the third day a wedding took place at cana in galilee. jesus’ mother was there,
the believers immediately sent paul to the coast, but silas and timothy stayed at berea.
admonishing word to a coughing child
the sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.
about nine in the morning he went out and saw others standing in the marketplace doing nothing.
carry in mouth, as an animal.
fare
to pant from exertion, be out of breath.
so whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, do it all for the glory of god.
drain (canal to drain water from pool to catch fish)
arrow
and, "if it is hard for the righteous to be saved, what will become of the ungodly and the sinner?"
they stood still, their faces downcast. one of them, named cleopas, asked him, "are you only a visitor to jerusalem and do not know the things that have happened there in these days?"
gums (of a person)
for moses said, 'honor your father and your mother,' and, 'anyone who curses his father or mother must be put to death.'
her neighbors and relatives heard that the lord had shown her great mercy, and they shared her joy.
abandon
“do not harm the land or the sea or the trees until we put a seal on the foreheads of the servants of our god.”
radio, tape recorder
forgive us our sins, for we also forgive everyone who sins against us. and lead us not into temptation. ' "
short-waisted blouse.
one day jesus said to his disciples, “let us go over to the other side of the lake.” so they got into a boat and set out.
when there is a shallow mini-lake of water which doesn’t dry up, that is a swamp because it has never ever (lit. not yet ever) been cut.
these books are stacked on top of each other.
the soldiers led jesus away into the palace (that is, the praetorium) and called together the whole company of soldiers.
as we passed to the lee of a small island called cauda, we were hardly able to make the lifeboat secure.
wild
the eye is the lamp of the body. if your eyes are healthy, your whole body will be full of light.
bad luck
hunger for fish or meat
this news about jesus spread throughout judea and the surrounding country.
to address
do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. rather, be afraid of the one who can destroy both soul and body in hell.
tears
to allow to grow back, recover
to this john replied, “a person can receive only what is given them from heaven.
they completely cut down all of the bamboo for weaving which i had planted without letting it be known by a request. that conduct of theirs usurped the rights of their companion.
when jesus came down from the mountainside, large crowds followed him.
mixed rice (white and red grains)
when there is a meeting, [many] people come together and see each other.
if any of you lacks wisdom, you should ask god, who gives generously to all without finding fault, and it will be given to you.
even if they sin against you seven times in a day and seven times come back to you saying ‘i repent,’ you must forgive them.”
lift up both hands
my grade one teacher was also the one who taught judith.
may have power, together with all the lord’s holy people, to grasp how wide and long and high and deep is the love of christ,
and a great crowd of people followed him because they saw the miraculous signs he had performed on the sick.
to protrude above the surface of something such as a shark's fin protrudes from the water or as veins protrude from the skin
"who are you?" they asked.
"come, follow me," jesus said, "and i will make you fishers of men." at once they left their nets and followed him.
head
the chief priests accused him of many things. so again pilate asked him, "aren't you going to answer? see how many things they are accusing you of."
the teacher puts up with the child who is always asking questions.
protrude; small camote; dislocated hip
tightly woven rattan container with a lid.
me
so that, having been justified by his grace, we might become heirs having the hope of eternal life.
on the eighth day, when it was time to circumcise the child, he was named jesus, the name the angel had given him before he was conceived.
on the last and greatest day of the feast, jesus stood and said in a loud voice, "if anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink.
but herod said, “i beheaded john. who, then, is this i hear such things about?” and he tried to see him.
you hold it out, i will take it
after all this had happened, paul decided to go to jerusalem, passing through macedonia and achaia. "after i have been there," he said, "i must visit rome also."
they arrived again in jerusalem, and while jesus was walking in the temple courts, the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders came to him.
be the one’s to do something
and all are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that came by jesus christ.
in their greed these teachers will exploit you with stories they have made up. their condemnation has long been hanging over them, and their destruction has not been sleeping.
"about jesus of nazareth," they replied. "he was a prophet, powerful in word and deed before god and all the people. the chief priests and our rulers handed him over to be sentenced to death, and they crucified him;
again they tried to seize him, but he escaped their grasp.
from my first corn harvest, only thirty sacks fit in my granary.
about that time there arose a great disturbance about the way.
jesus stopped and called them. “what do you want me to do for you?” he asked.
jesus said to the woman, “your faith has saved you; go in peace.”
[speak] louder when you speak so that the others can hear
the first man was of the dust of the earth, the second man from heaven.
some jews who went around driving out evil spirits tried to invoke the name of the lord jesus over those who were demon-possessed. they would say, “in the name of the jesus whom paul preaches, i command you to come out.”
friendship name
day after day every priest stands and performs his religious duties; again and again he offers the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins.
crippled
and so we know and rely on the love god has for us. god is love. whoever lives in love lives in god, and god in him.
sob
lightning
our shoulders may be put out of joint by carrying a heavy load of waterpoles
swelling of jaw or jaws below the ear, especially of mumps.
cut off
"we can," they answered. jesus said to them, "you will drink the cup i drink and be baptized with the baptism i am baptized with,
have you suffered so much for nothing- -if it really was for nothing?
when a woman is pregnant, her stomach protrudes; that is it becomes rounded.
greet asyncritus, phlegon, hermes, patrobas, hermas and the brothers with them.
palm of hand
then peter came to jesus and asked, “lord, how many times shall i forgive my brother or sister who sins against me? up to seven times?”
when he would not be dissuaded, we gave up and said, “the lord’s will be done.”
after the reading from the law and the prophets, the leaders of the synagogue sent word to them, saying, “brothers, if you have a word of exhortation for the people, please speak.”
a kind of black rice.
“to the angel of the church in ephesus write: these are the words of him who holds the seven stars in his right hand and walks among the seven golden lampstands.
after this the lord appointed seventy-two others and sent them two by two ahead of him to every town and place where he was about to go.
everyone who competes in the games goes into strict training. they do it to get a crown that will not last; but we do it to get a crown that will last forever.
whether it is high or short, thick or thin, if it is in the yard and surrounds a house, it is called a fense.
to keep for oneself
gaius, whose hospitality i and the whole church here enjoy, sends you his greetings. erastus, who is the city's director of public works, and our brother quartus send you their greetings.
to make.
your gold and silver are corroded. their corrosion will testify against you and eat your flesh like fire. you have hoarded wealth in the last days.
travel by pair
one strand
as paul discoursed on righteousness, self-control and the judgment to come, felix was afraid and said, "that's enough for now! you may leave. when i find it convenient, i will send for you."
when jesus entered jerusalem, the whole city was stirred and asked, “who is this?”
a kind of watermelon.
his mother said, "come here because i will listen to your stomach to find out why your stomach is growling."
then he went upstairs again and broke bread and ate. after talking until daylight, he left.
to move very close
see hagamhagam (worrying)
are we beginning to commend ourselves again? or do we need, like some people, letters of recommendation to you or from you?
one person killed by one raider
things, belongings
igì’s middle finger was inadvertently cut off
and he went outside and wept bitterly.
but jesus said, “someone touched me; i know that power has gone out from me.”
greet all your leaders and all god's people. those from italy send you their greetings.
and they cannot prove to you the charges they are now making against me.
jesus said to her, “mary.” she turned toward him and cried out in aramaic, “rabboni!” (which means “teacher”).
there is, there are
crippled
i got tired of waiting for you; i was here earlier.
they think it strange that you do not plunge with them into the same flood of dissipation, and they heap abuse on you.
he chews trash.
you were slow to make your purchase of the axe because you needed its price to be reduced.
become bent, as an arrow
so the other disciples told him, "we have seen the lord!" but he said to them, "unless i see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where the nails were, and put my hand into his side, i will not believe it."
festus, wishing to do the jews a favor, said to paul, “are you willing to go up to jerusalem and stand trial before me there on these charges?”
when the boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
as for flour, if we shake the sack of flour, it will become dust because it becomes airborne.
potty or bladder
nevertheless, god's solid foundation stands firm, sealed with this inscription: "the lord knows those who are his," and, "everyone who confesses the name of the lord must turn away from wickedness."
who will not fear you, o lord, and bring glory to your name? for you alone are holy. all nations will come and worship before you, for your righteous acts have been revealed."
the outer side of a house.
for the wages of sin is death, but the gift of god is eternal life in christ jesus our lord.
[she/they??] regret having married.
the owner’s servants came to him and said, ‘sir, didn’t you sow good seed in your field? where then did the weeds come from?’
may the god of peace, who through the blood of the eternal covenant brought back from the dead our lord jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep,
to some who were confident of their own righteousness and looked down on everyone else, jesus told this parable:
regarding a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space [made from the lift].
there some people brought to him a man who was deaf and could hardly talk, and they begged him to place his hand on the man.
climb down
do all have gifts of healing? do all speak in tongues ? do all interpret?
touch
we did not follow cleverly invented stories when we told you about the power and coming of our lord jesus christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
keyed up as when feeling rushed to leave on a trip
to plan
clap one’s hands
jesus said to him, "let the dead bury their own dead, but you go and proclaim the kingdom of god."
the seventy-two returned with joy and said, “lord, even the demons submit to us in your name.”
this is how my heavenly father will treat each of you unless you forgive your brother or sister from your heart.”
make room for us in your hearts. we have wronged no one, we have corrupted no one, we have exploited no one.
as for the person who makes fire by rubbing something back and forth, [the fire] is alive if it begins to smoke.
tassel or blossom
shout in anger at someone.
pray that i may proclaim it clearly, as i should.
then, leaving her water jar, the woman went back to the town and said to the people,
protect
ripe
loneliness.
but if you show favoritism, you sin and are convicted by the law as lawbreakers.
we don't have [enough] rice to lend because we have just enough left for one meal.
i will borrow [some] of your money because i will go to dugayan. just estimate enough for my round trip from dugayan
for this was how the promise was stated: “at the appointed time i will return, and sarah will have a son.”
cogon grass
if you love those who love you, what reward will you get? are not even the tax collectors doing that?
he went on to say, "this is why i told you that no one can come to me unless the father has enabled him."
subtract
when we harvest a leaf of the alik-ik plant, [we get] just one piece.
now an angel of the lord said to philip, “go south to the road—the desert road—that goes down from jerusalem to gaza.”
a deacon must be faithful to his wife and must manage his children and his household well.
downpayment
the roof didn’t leak.
lean away
that there were no needy persons among them. for from time to time those who owned land or houses sold them, brought the money from the sales
there was some extra money left over.
to gaze or look down carefully at something
move to another location
the evening meal was in progress, and the devil had already prompted judas, the son of simon iscariot, to betray jesus.
our ancestors worshiped on this mountain, but you jews claim that the place where we must worship is in jerusalem.”
the older people go out to a field of matured secondary growth and have a ceremony to determine whether it would be good to cut the growth on that piece of ground for a field.
sniffle.
disbelieve
he said to his disciples, "why are you so afraid? do you still have no faith?"
an eye condition characterized by redness; pink eye
again jesus began to teach by the lake. the crowd that gathered around him was so large that he got into a boat and sat in it out on the lake, while all the people were along the shore at the water's edge.
eat, sleep, or sit on the bare floor
treacherous, rash, conceited, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of god—
then he went out to the gateway, where another servant girl saw him and said to the people there, “this fellow was with jesus of nazareth.”
when there are many [grubs] which are making whispery  and gurgling, rumbling [sounds], then we split knotched pula palm log and we see many grubs which are squirming.
ambush (children's game of raiders)
simon (whom he named peter), his brother andrew, james, john, philip, bartholomew,
a dog when it gives birth, puppy is the name of its offspring.
you know, brothers and sisters, that our visit to you was not without results.
handle
when they heard that jesus was alive and that she had seen him, they did not believe it.
if there are a lot of dirty spider webs, we brush off the webs (lit. houses) of the spiders so that they will be removed. when we brush them off, the debris drops to the floor.
to overwork someone.
he must turn from evil and do good; he must seek peace and pursue it.
to not be still a minute
for even christ did not please himself but, as it is written: “the insults of those who insult you have fallen on me.”
the whole assembly became silent as they listened to barnabas and paul telling about the signs and wonders god had done among the gentiles through them.
the bird's weight is two kilos.
these things happened to them as examples and were written down as warnings for us, on whom the fulfillment of the ages has come.
for we were all baptized by one spirit into one body--whether jews or greeks, slave or free--and we were all given the one spirit to drink.
“the one who enters by the gate is the shepherd of the sheep.”
bump
center section of a field left unharvested
to wrap and bind something into a pack
log, uprooted stump which does not have any more leaves left, just its body.
the eye becomes long; [you are] staring.
after that, there was something that just caused to drop in front of us.
so the disciples did as jesus had directed them and prepared the passover.
if one is ill and the fever is excessive, his mouth clamps together.
to increase
therefore, since the promise of entering his rest still stands, let us be careful that none of you be found to have fallen short of it.
his head was brought in on a platter and given to the girl, who carried it to her mother.
the mother may roll on the child.
grip tightly
on hearing this report, the captain of the temple guard and the chief priests were at a loss, wondering what this might lead to.
by faith the people passed through the red sea as on dry land; but when the egyptians tried to do so, they were drowned.
sprout
a plant with smooth, flexible stems which has a soft, spongy core.
thin
"yes, lord," she replied, "but even the dogs under the table eat the children's crumbs.
to go down to the sea
but now you must also rid yourselves of all such things as these: anger, rage, malice, slander, and filthy language from your lips.
then paul left the synagogue and went next door to the house of titius justus, a worshiper of god.
"my children, i will be with you only a little longer. you will look for me, and just as i told the jews, so i tell you now: where i am going, you cannot come.
wooden bar used in weaving
cut off
when they had eaten as much as they wanted, they lightened the ship by throwing the grain into the sea.
if the the [amount of] rain is a lot, the inside of the boat will be filled
beautician
and all the ways that wickedness deceives those who are perishing. they perish because they refused to love the truth and so be saved.
earth
think about me. [take care of me.]
later jesus appeared to the eleven as they were eating; he rebuked them for their lack of faith and their stubborn refusal to believe those who had seen him after he had risen.
opposition arose, however, from members of the synagogue of the freedmen (as it was called)—jews of cyrene and alexandria as well as the provinces of cilicia and asia—who began to argue with stephen.
to happen to clink together making a clanging or clinking sound
he has lost connection with the head, from whom the whole body, supported and held together by its ligaments and sinews, grows as god causes it to grow.
as for a charm, we put a charm on a girl when we don't have courage to ask.
disobey or go beyond someone’s advice
we won’t let the hen develop her eggs.
philip said, “lord, show us the father and that will be enough for us.”
jesus stopped and ordered the man to be brought to him. when he came near, jesus asked him,
while he was in bethany, reclining at the table in the home of a man known as simon the leper, a woman came with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume, made of pure nard. she broke the jar and poured the perfume on his head.
to seek fame, try to make oneself famous.
lukewarm (only used for water)
if someone has an infected sore, he will peel off some tobacco and apply it to the sore to keep off the flies.
for we cannot do anything against the truth, but only for the truth.
fist fight
kind of climbing bamboo used for weaving.
now it was the custom at the feast to release a prisoner whom the people requested.
if the creatures become silent, they simultaneously stop making a noise.
satan was still thinking about what next he could use to test jesus.
i tell you this so that no one may deceive you by fine-sounding arguments.
baby bird.
to cut open an animal's body
in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
but he said, “i must proclaim the good news of the kingdom of god to the other towns also, because that is why i was sent.”
dishevelled, as cord or thread
"this calls for a mind with wisdom. the seven heads are seven hills on which the woman sits.
bees sting
wriggle as one's stomach when one is hungry.
"do not handle! do not taste! do not touch!"?
when jesus said this, one of the officials nearby struck him in the face. "is this the way you answer the high priest?" he demanded.
to be slow to do something
the colt t[ries to] shake off [the rope] if it is tethered.
if i give all i possess to the poor and give over my body to hardship that i may boast, but do not have love, i gain nothing.
do not get any gold or silver or copper to take with you in your belts—
if there are those in some village who are under someone's authority, it's as though they are all his subjects.
plant seedlings of tobacco or papaya.
pound rice with short, quick strokes to poke around in the ground with a stick
he replied, “if you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mulberry tree, ‘be uprooted and planted in the sea,’ and it will obey you.
for i tell you that unless your righteousness surpasses that of the pharisees and the teachers of the law, you will certainly not enter the kingdom of heaven.
we who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak and not to please ourselves.
a necklace; a bead.
dangerous
the manipulation of a baby's position before and during the birthing process.
but with loud shouts they insistently demanded that he be crucified, and their shouts prevailed.
tie the goat to something because it is eating the plants.
the balaring is an ear plug necklace which has decorative notches.
bounce in time to music.
every day i was with you in the temple courts, and you did not lay a hand on me. but this is your hour--when darkness reigns."
when the trigger slips off, the lever which kills or traps the animal is released.
greet urbanus, our co-worker in christ, and my dear friend stachys.
“say to daughter zion, ‘see, your king comes to you, gentle and riding on a donkey, and on a colt, the foal of a donkey.’”
when it arrives, it finds the house swept clean and put in order.
if our blood is lacking we will be lightheaded when we walk and we won't be able to manage to get around.
why question me? ask those who heard me. surely they know what i said."
they replied, “some say john the baptist; others say elijah; and still others, jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
right here
a greedy person as someone who would eat up leftovers and not think of someone else's needs
the cob of the corn, it is its stem on the inside [of the ear of corn].
then the end will come, when he hands over the kingdom to god the father after he has destroyed all dominion, authority and power.
out of the temple came the seven angels with the seven plagues. they were dressed in clean, shining linen and wore golden sashes around their chests.
swim deeply
shrink, make smaller
their bodies will lie in the public square of the great city—which is figuratively called sodom and egypt—where also their lord was crucified.
but some of them went to the pharisees and told them what jesus had done.
but since you do not believe what he wrote, how are you going to believe what i say?”
jesus replied, "if anyone loves me, he will obey my teaching. my father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him.
stay together
when i played ball, my foot was sprained and so it became difficult for me to walk because it swelled and was a whole week before the swelling went down.
we are taken by surprise that we have seen someone. we are simply surprised, that's all.
the earthquake is strong.
“you’re out of your mind,” they told her. when she kept insisting that it was so, they said, “it must be his angel.”
[some manuscripts include: philip said, “if you believe with all your heart, you may.” the eunuch answered, “i believe that jesus christ is the son of god.”]
and you, my child, will be called a prophet of the most high; for you will go on before the lord to prepare the way for him,
in those days caesar augustus issued a decree that a census should be taken of the entire roman world.
whatever house you enter, stay there until you leave that town.
yet he did not waver through unbelief regarding the promise of god, but was strengthened in his faith and gave glory to god,
he said to another man, "follow me." but the man replied, "lord, first let me go and bury my father."
what
look, your house is left to you desolate.
dish up food
i turned around to see the voice that was speaking to me. and when i turned i saw seven golden lampstands,
do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.
arrow(s), or spear(s), [or] a spear trap are that which are used for hunting.
those in sulit, langilan, banuwaloy, kapugi, and pipisan, that is the word they use.
herald
"no one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment. if he does, the new piece will pull away from the old, making the tear worse.
but the seed on good soil stands for those with a noble and good heart, who hear the word, retain it, and by persevering produce a crop.
another
he doesn't want someone to take [some of the rambatans].
the carabao which is pulling a cart as it hauls corn will experience difficulty if there are those who ride on it.
so when you, a mere human being, pass judgment on them and yet do the same things, do you think you will escape god’s judgment?
to cut wedges or chips out of something
if there are those who are bathing and are always floating downstream, that is drifting together with the current.
by all this we are encouraged.
a game in which a small arch is set in the ground
let no one on the housetop go down to take anything out of the house.
anyone who does not listen to him will be completely cut off from their people.’
expensive
at one time we too were foolish, disobedient, deceived and enslaved by all kinds of passions and pleasures. we lived in malice and envy, being hated and hating one another.
then he said, “here i am, i have come to do your will.” he sets aside the first to establish the second.
large bead.
all wrongdoing is sin, and there is sin that does not lead to death.
[at] the end(s) of a cluster of rice grain stems, it is there [the rice] begins to ripen.
see out of corner of eye
yours
restrain yourself
as they stretched him out to flog him, paul said to the centurion standing there, "is it legal for you to flog a roman citizen who hasn't even been found guilty?"
my father, who has given them to me, is greater than all ; no one can snatch them out of my father's hand.
protest against anything offending the senses of smell, taste or feel;
lita told mery that she would sleep at her [place].
turn up the volume (lit. operation of) the radio.
to be curved, as a road
frighten each other
manner of living
then he took it down, wrapped it in linen cloth and placed it in a tomb cut in the rock, one in which no one had yet been laid.
the cat's hand was swift to claw the snake.
he told antonio to tell someone else.
fight
and will pay no attention to jewish myths or to the commands of those who reject the truth.
to lift with a lever, that is the beginning of turning the log over. it is lifted by leverage so it will roll.
out of his mouth comes a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations. "he will rule them with an iron scepter." he treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of god almighty.
but also for us, to whom god will credit righteousness—for us who believe in him who raised jesus our lord from the dead.
and he did not do many miracles there because of their lack of faith.
and in the church god has appointed first of all apostles, second prophets, third teachers, then workers of miracles, also those having gifts of healing, those able to help others, those with gifts of administration, and those speaking in different kinds of tongues.
but the things that come out of a person’s mouth come from the heart, and these defile them.
jesus knew what they were thinking and asked, “why are you thinking these things in your hearts?
when the wine was gone, jesus’ mother said to him, “they have no more wine.”
the wooden crosspiece which marks [it], that is the sign that there is an owner.
god did not reject his people, whom he foreknew. don’t you know what scripture says in the passage about elijah—how he appealed to god against israel:
now those who had been scattered by the persecution that broke out when stephen was killed traveled as far as phoenicia, cyprus and antioch, spreading the word only among jews.
chin
winnowing tray
the [piece of] wood which is a lever, that is the thing used for leverage is put underneath
there is a tarp which was used to cap ena's house.
if the limestone is pounded into a powder it can by used as lime.
red betel spittle
watch out that you do not lose what you have worked for, but that you may be rewarded fully.
shoulder
the reason we say we sit in a circle to eat together is because we are facing each other.
i have much to write to you, but i do not want to use paper and ink. instead, i hope to visit you and talk with you face to face, so that our joy may be complete.
we all
after sighting cyprus and passing to the south of it, we sailed on to syria. we landed at tyre, where our ship was to unload its cargo.
kind of white millet
mother returned home first because her breasts were already engorged with milk.
while people are saying, “peace and safety,” destruction will come on them suddenly, as labor pains on a pregnant woman, and they will not escape.
“woman, why do you involve me?” jesus replied. “my hour has not yet come.”
this is the first and greatest commandment.
to be self-controlled and pure, to be busy at home, to be kind, and to be subject to their husbands, so that no one will malign the word of god.
as soon as the grain is ripe, he puts the sickle to it, because the harvest has come."
a destitute person who is always being scolded, when [the criticism] affects him deeply emotionally so that he can no longer endure it, he will have to react.
to which of the angels did god ever say, “sit at my right hand until i make your enemies a footstool for your feet”?
accept one another, then, just as christ accepted you, in order to bring praise to god.
if a rope is pulled out from a spool, it will be stretched out.
our stomach wriggles when we are hungry.
then they looked for a way to arrest him because they knew he had spoken the parable against them. but they were afraid of the crowd; so they left him and went away.
we’ll pound the rice together.
wealthy in clothing
lose something by misplacing it
to expel gas.
to find.
the other person was defeated because he picked lansones.
there was a violent earthquake, for an angel of the lord came down from heaven and, going to the tomb, rolled back the stone and sat on it.
slave
they replied, "are you from galilee, too? look into it, and you will find that a prophet does not come out of galilee."
locate; be near something
pray that this will not take place in winter,
esophagus
to step,
for god has bound all men over to disobedience so that he may have mercy on them all.
to become frustrated
as for flour, if we shake the sack of flour, it will become dust because it becomes airborne.
don’t you remember that when i was with you i used to tell you these things?
ancestor
quenched the fury of the flames, and escaped the edge of the sword; whose weakness was turned to strength; and who became powerful in battle and routed foreign armies.
whether women or men, the relationship of the spouses of their siblings is called patala-iras "spouses-in-law."
then the whole town went out to meet jesus. and when they saw him, they pleaded with him to leave their region.
large cheeks.
for i know your eagerness to help, and i have been boasting about it to the macedonians, telling them that since last year you in achaia were ready to give; and your enthusiasm has stirred most of them to action.
and josiah the father of jeconiah and his brothers at the time of the exile to babylon.
if someone asks, “what day is tomorrow?” the reason he is asking is because he does not know whether the next day might be monday or wednesday.
kind of crayfish with big, long pinchers
"father, if you are willing, take this cup from me; yet not my will, but yours be done."
what will we do since it keeps on raining?
the horses are racing each other.
some time ago when i was still a child, i had an ailment called alap-ap but i cured it with the plant kapigsula which grows on the beach.
a hem
many of those who believed now came and openly confessed what they had done.
wade across water
since, then, we know what it is to fear the lord, we try to persuade others. what we are is plain to god, and i hope it is also plain to your conscience.
but the other criminal rebuked him. "don't you fear god," he said, "since you are under the same sentence?
for this reason christ is the mediator of a new covenant, that those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance--now that he has died as a ransom to set them free from the sins committed under the first covenant.
you led each other to embrace because you had been reconciled.
to have someone hear what we have to say
sleep deeply
repair
for you know what instructions we gave you by the authority of the lord jesus.
jesus said to the servants, “fill the jars with water”; so they filled them to the brim.
then he sent another servant to them; they struck this man on the head and treated him shamefully.
joke
then the man said, "lord, i believe," and he worshiped him.
for where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
feed a fire
tearful, crying continually
try to resussicate or revive someone such as a person who has fainted or is dying.
we’re going to start harvesting rice today.
a person who has a kuglung instrument, took bislig ratan and attached [them] to his kuglung.
returning the third time, he said to them, "are you still sleeping and resting? enough! the hour has come. look, the son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
bounce in time to music.
then he began to call down curses, and he swore to them, “i don’t know the man!” immediately a rooster crowed.
pay attention to the child who is leaning [out of] the window who will fall after a while.
then i heard what sounded like a great multitude, like the roar of rushing waters and like loud peals of thunder, shouting: “hallelujah! for our lord god almighty reigns.
temporary shelter
as for a person exalting himself, when in a discussion, he loudly brags and says, "my own name is that which is able to lift up our companion who is overwhelmed by a problem."
for he vigorously refuted the jews in public debate, proving from the scriptures that jesus was the christ.
fish eggs
so the man gave them his attention, expecting to get something from them.
they got up, drove him out of the town, and took him to the brow of the hill on which the town was built, in order to throw him off the cliff.
there is a [kind of] wood which is called gisois which is ignited there by the rice so that it will be smoked.
the apostles said to the lord, “increase our faith!”
the albino  antabun heron has no mixture of design because it is completely white.
not many of you should presume to be teachers, my brothers, because you know that we who teach will be judged more strictly.
once more he visited cana in galilee, where he had turned the water into wine. and there was a certain royal official whose son lay sick at capernaum.
saying to them, “go to the village ahead of you, and at once you will find a donkey tied there, with her colt by her. untie them and bring them to me.
ten
oh, the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of god! how unsearchable his judgments, and his paths beyond tracing out!
i speak to sensible people; judge for yourselves what i say.
older person; adult
if we step on the ripe fruit of the papaya, it will be squashed.
and if he rescued lot, a righteous man, who was distressed by the filthy lives of lawless men
bohemian waxwing bird (with feathered headdress)
to plant tobacco
we were taken by surprise because we had not been asked
and when the blood of your martyr stephen was shed, i stood there giving my approval and guarding the clothes of those who were killing him.'
name of a village named after a stream.
for the son of man in his day will be like the lightning, which flashes and lights up the sky from one end to the other.
therefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices; my body also will rest in hope,
to make a rhythmic noise with the pestle
obey them not only to win their favor when their eye is on you, but like slaves of christ, doing the will of god from your heart.
grow or develop
when the sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard him were amazed.
then jesus said, "he who has ears to hear, let him hear."
“why do you ask me about what is good?” jesus replied. “there is only one who is good. if you want to enter life, keep the commandments.”
therefore, my dear brothers, stand firm. let nothing move you. always give yourselves fully to the work of the lord, because you know that your labor in the lord is not in vain.
to cut the neck of a pig or chicken
grace and peace to you from god our father and the lord jesus christ.
unless it was this one thing i shouted as i stood in their presence: 'it is concerning the resurrection of the dead that i am on trial before you today.' "
offense
watch your life and doctrine closely. persevere in them, because if you do, you will save both yourself and your hearers.
intestines
they were pleased to do it, and indeed they owe it to them. for if the gentiles have shared in the jews' spiritual blessings, they owe it to the jews to share with them their material blessings.
we press and rub the sharpening stone against the bolo, axe, or knife in order to sharpen its edge.
as for the person who is going to buy rice in patil when there is no rice because the stores sold out, he just returns empty handed having gone to buy when there wasn't any rice.
if anyone does not love the lord--a curse be on him. come, o lord !
borrow
to cut and trim stalks and tips from any kind of bamboo
if there are a lot of dirty spider webs, we brush off the webs (lit. houses) of the spiders so that they will be removed. when we brush them off, the debris drops to the floor.
to make] inagkud, we get corn, rice or some other [ingredient] which is mixed together as ingredients.
this is good, and pleases god our savior,
“i do not accept glory from human beings,
let’s fill the basket with camotes.
constricted
because anyone who serves christ in this way is pleasing to god and approved by men.
we'll be poisoned or hexed.
put medicine leaf on a swelling or pain
we had just barely sat down when guests arrived and caught us as we were eating.
yet, because moses gave you circumcision (though actually it did not come from moses, but from the patriarchs), you circumcise a child on the sabbath.
now the pharisees who had been sent
for we brought nothing into the world, and we can take nothing out of it.
tuck tail between legs
consider the ravens: they do not sow or reap, they have no storeroom or barn; yet god feeds them. and how much more valuable you are than birds!
i plead with euodia and i plead with syntyche to be of the same mind in the lord.
one day jesus was teaching, and pharisees and teachers of the law were sitting there. they had come from every village of galilee and from judea and jerusalem. and the power of the lord was present for him to heal the sick.
the meaning is jumbled when there are words which don't fit.
produce
to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has freely given us in the one he loves.
to be sprawled out on the ground (lifeless or unconscious)
and whoever wants to be first must be your slave—
“haven’t you read,” he replied, “that at the beginning the creator ‘made them male and female,’
by faith jacob, when he was dying, blessed each of joseph's sons, and worshiped as he leaned on the top of his staff.
that talk missed the point
“a farmer went out to sow his seed. as he was scattering the seed, some fell along the path; it was trampled on, and the birds ate it up.
artery
a kind of fish.
the leaves of the lupit tree are used like sandpaper to smooth objects such as handles, sheaths, and other wooden or bamboo items.
in the past, he let all nations go their own way.
a kind of red rice.
arrow(s), or spear(s), [or] a spear trap are that which are used for hunting.
but it will be more bearable for tyre and sidon at the judgment than for you.
nose.
but understand this: if the owner of the house had known at what time of night the thief was coming, he would have kept watch and would not have let his house be broken into.
and when he had given thanks, he broke it and said, "this is my body, which is for you; do this in remembrance of me."
wise
to solve a difficult problem
when we slide [the box] portion into the match container, its body matches.
to peel
it is enough for students to be like their teachers, and servants like their masters. if the head of the house has been called beelzebul, how much more the members of his household!
perhaps the people were saying, “so then when john grows up, he/they ?? won’t move when john speaks.”
to swat
but peter and john replied, “which is right in god’s eyes: to listen to you, or to him? you be the judges!
but they paid no attention and went off—one to his field, another to his business.
who is the liar? it is the man who denies that jesus is the christ. such a man is the antichrist--he denies the father and the son.
to be dispirited, weak, or depressed
and now you know what is holding him back, so that he may be revealed at the proper time.
you watch in readiness to spear a fish and when one happens to get close, you spear it as you jab/thrust at it.
affected
i always thank my god as i remember you in my prayers,
then jesus went back across the jordan to the place where john had been baptizing in the early days. here he stayed
to cure
so in everything, do to others what you would have them do to you, for this sums up the law and the prophets.
the last of harvest
but elymas the sorcerer (for that is what his name means) opposed them and tried to turn the proconsul from the faith.
for through the spirit we eagerly await by faith the righteousness for which we hope.
"after an absence of several years, i came to jerusalem to bring my people gifts for the poor and to present offerings.

any kind of  shrimp or crayfish.
that which we use to treat [crops] are plants, banga palm, fan palm, plants of the field, vines which are the treatments of plants.
“now this is eternal life: that they know you, the only true god, and jesus christ, whom you have sent.”
i knew that you always hear me, but i said this for the benefit of the people standing here, that they may believe that you sent me."
hold them in the highest regard in love because of their work. live in peace with each other.
three days later he called together the leaders of the jews. when they had assembled, paul said to them: "my brothers, although i have done nothing against our people or against the customs of our ancestors, i was arrested in jerusalem and handed over to the romans.
so, because you are lukewarm-- neither hot nor cold--i am about to spit you out of my mouth.
when he had said this, he knelt down with all of them and prayed.
what relation
when he found one of great value, he went away and sold everything he had and bought it.
we are not accustomed to those kinds of fish [lit. viand]. we are accustomed to having no [means of catching] fish.
the bones which are left over are fed to the dogs.
sickness
dish food
we felt his foot.
dwarf
clearing; atmosphere near the earth
this, then, is how you should pray: “our father in heaven, hallowed be your name,
nothing in all creation is hidden from god’s sight. everything is uncovered and laid bare before the eyes of him to whom we must give account.
he said to her, "daughter, your faith has healed you. go in peace and be freed from your suffering."
when he arrived in galilee, the galileans welcomed him. they had seen all that he had done in jerusalem at the passover festival, for they also had been there.
why don’t they dig camotes?
name of a village
apply blood to something during a sacrifice
blood
he asked her, “woman, why are you crying? who is it you are looking for?” thinking he was the gardener, she said, “sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him, and i will get him.”
the day which will arrive, that is tomorrow.
relate
and would not allow anyone to carry merchandise through the temple courts.
they replied, "we have not received any letters from judea concerning you, and none of the brothers who have come from there has reported or said anything bad about you.
veins, of a leaf
the whole judean countryside and all the people of jerusalem went out to him. confessing their sins, they were baptized by him in the jordan river.
a metal band reinforcing a bolo handle or spear shaft
if we are burning a field and the wind is strong, there will be a lot of embers that leap up and over to another mountain, which will also catch fire.
mortar for pounding rice
to mess with, bother someone or something.
people will come from east and west and north and south, and will take their places at the feast in the kingdom of god.
happen close together
when they had done so, they caught such a large number of fish that their nets began to break.
sandpaper
when you make a fish trap, it is loosely woven. the body of the fishtrap is loosely woven and the prongs are also far apart.
“the thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy; i have come that they may have life, and have it to the full.”
withhold food
for even his own brothers did not believe in him.
to deliberately exposed to smoke
i’ll yank your head back after a while.
this was to fulfill the word of isaiah the prophet: "lord, who has believed our message and to whom has the arm of the lord been revealed?"
i want to know christ—yes, to know the power of his resurrection and participation in his sufferings, becoming like him in his death,
fish.
very strong; sturdy
peaceful, free from trouble
if the rice is rained on, it will be ruined.
i appeal to you for my son onesimus, who became my son while i was in chains.
perhaps this is your size
firefly.
when the chief priests and the pharisees heard jesus’ parables, they knew he was talking about them.
for though we live in the world, we do not wage war as the world does.
e often inadvertently scare away green lizards on a trail. on occasion [they] come into a house to prey on large or small cockroaches.
so they too have now become disobedient in order that they too may now receive mercy as a result of god's mercy to you.
slave
with respect to sayote vegetable in the refrigerator, if it becomes thin and has shrunk, it is said to be shriveled.
the second woe has passed; the third woe is coming soon.
location
compassionate
and if the spirit of him who raised jesus from the dead is living in you, he who raised christ from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies because of his spirit who lives in you.
prolific; have a lot of offspring
cheerful
as for the child whose body is excessively hot, the heat radiates. when we touch our hand to his body it is hot.
look, your house is left to you desolate. i tell you, you will not see me again until you say, 'blessed is he who comes in the name of the lord.' "
adam's apple
we were invited by vivian to eat lunch
“how can someone be born when they are old?” nicodemus asked. “surely they cannot enter a second time into their mother’s womb to be born!”
a small white crayfish.
but the one who hears my words and does not put them into practice is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation. the moment the torrent struck that house, it collapsed and its destruction was complete.”
abandon
we dove into the water.
they recognized him as the same man who used to sit begging at the temple gate called beautiful, and they were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.
soot
when jesus said, “i am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground.
again, if the trumpet does not sound a clear call, who will get ready for battle?
he told them, “the harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few. ask the lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.
when daylight came, they did not recognize the land, but they saw a bay with a sandy beach, where they decided to run the ship aground if they could.
in the center, around the throne, were four living creatures, and they were covered with eyes, in front and in back. the first living creature was like a lion, the second was like an ox, the third had a face like a man, the fourth was like a flying eagle.
chewed off
crook one’s finger
as for the body of a ship, the bow, that is what goes first.
as he went along, he saw a man blind from birth.
for as woman came from man, so also man is born of woman. but everything comes from god.
a long curved bolo, esp. one with a wavy blade.
to become entangled in, as in one's problems or difficulties.
no matter where he may catch a pig, he endures carrying it on his back.
i have given her time to repent of her immorality, but she is unwilling.
from that time on jesus began to preach, “repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.”
we offend people
shaman, one who contacts the spirit world.
to be removed from something
while the women were on their way, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests everything that had happened.
we have not received the spirit of the world but the spirit who is from god, that we may understand what god has freely given us.
there are people who will hide whose purpose is to scare us so that we will be afraid.
to teach to a person or animal how to do something.
i was using a light to fish for small bullhead fish in the liboganon river.
‘after this i will return and rebuild david’s fallen tent. its ruins i will rebuild, and i will restore it,
praise be to the god and father of our lord jesus christ, who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in christ.
jesus answered, “are there not twelve hours of daylight? anyone who walks in the daytime will not stumble, for they see by this world’s light.”
the men who were guarding jesus began mocking and beating him.
eat anything sold in the meat market without raising questions of conscience,
the second woe has passed; the third woe is coming soon.
as a result, they do not live the rest of their earthly lives for evil human desires, but rather for the will of god.
pretend
give in to someone’s begging
now on his way to jerusalem, jesus traveled along the border between samaria and galilee.
and a woman was there who had been crippled by a spirit for eighteen years. she was bent over and could not straighten up at all.
baptize
after this i saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding back the four winds of the earth to prevent any wind from blowing on the land or on the sea or on any tree.
to hollow out a tree
so they pulled their boats up on shore, left everything and followed him.
so when i was sent for, i came without raising any objection. may i ask why you sent for me?”
but when they came to jesus and found that he was already dead, they did not break his legs.
rub something between the hands
as they approached the village to which they were going, jesus acted as if he were going farther.
loosen
a man is not a jew if he is only one outwardly, nor is circumcision merely outward and physical.
after they had further proclaimed the word of the lord and testified about jesus, peter and john returned to jerusalem, preaching the gospel in many samaritan villages.
so then, death is at work in us, but life is at work in you.
wives, submit to your husbands, as is fitting in the lord.
for something to become clear
he told us how he had seen an angel appear in his house and say, ‘send to joppa for simon who is called peter.
when they heard [that], they said, “stand still. there is something moaning.”
by faith abraham, even though he was past age--and sarah herself was barren- -was enabled to become a father because he considered him faithful who had made the promise.
when mary reached the place where jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet and said, "lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died."
and in him you too are being built together to become a dwelling in which god lives by his spirit.
be wavy, have multiple curves
unanimous
as for a ladder, it has two leaning posts and there are cross-pieces.
straighten bones, adjust bones, massage.
in the same way, the spirit helps us in our weakness. we do not know what we ought to pray for, but the spirit himself intercedes for us through wordless groans.
we’re irritated because we have to walk.
grimace or grin, as a baby monkey when frightened
accompany or deliver something partway
become bent, as an arrow
when the pharisee who had invited him saw this, he said to himself, “if this man were a prophet, he would know who is touching him and what kind of woman she is—that she is a sinner.”
“this is the same moses they had rejected with the words, ‘who made you ruler and judge?’ he was sent to be their ruler and deliverer by god himself, through the angel who appeared to him in the bush.
a sleeveless undershirt
you may die of hunger.
dizzy
canoe.
to strangle
“put your sword back in its place,” jesus said to him, “for all who draw the sword will die by the sword.
emotionally strong (resisting undeserved abuse)
large eyes
kept awake
heel
when the angel who spoke to him had gone, cornelius called two of his servants and a devout soldier who was one of his attendants.
the seed that fell among thorns stands for those who hear, but as they go on their way they are choked by life’s worries, riches and pleasures, and they do not mature.
snake
a child cries for her if he is searching for his mother.
a strong wind was blowing and the waters grew rough.
mix different kinds together
you who have received the law that was given through angels but have not obeyed it.”
then they asked him, “where is your father?”
to plan
ever since i was a child, i have always lived in mansalinao.
to perspire
jesus called his twelve disciples to him and gave them authority to drive out impure spirits and to heal every disease and sickness.
after six days jesus took with him peter, james and john the brother of james, and led them up a high mountain by themselves.
pilate then went back inside the palace, summoned jesus and asked him, "are you the king of the jews?"
if the end of the pangi fruit is ripening, it is right for us to take [it] and eat and suck and chew the fruit off of the seed.
to solve a difficult problem
to examine closely; to discern identity by seeing or hearing
after this letter has been read to you, see that it is also read in the church of the laodiceans and that you in turn read the letter from laodicea.
no matter where he may catch a pig, he endures carrying it on his back.
refuse
and he carried me away in the spirit to a mountain great and high, and showed me the holy city, jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from god.
but he said to them, "it is i; don't be afraid."
but peter had to wait outside at the door. the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, came back, spoke to the servant girl on duty there and brought peter in.
“to the angel of the church in pergamum write: these are the words of him who has the sharp, double-edged sword.
he traveled through that area, speaking many words of encouragement to the people, and finally arrived in greece,
garlic
force one’s way into, attack
nor did they repent of their murders, their magic arts, their sexual immorality or their thefts.
and where these have been forgiven, there is no longer any sacrifice for sin.
to make short, quick, side motions with a bolo on a flat surface
plant used for fish poison.
rub something between the hands
as it is, there are many parts, but one body.
to have a head-on collision
when the sun goes down, it begins to become dark.
and he was in the desert forty days, being tempted by satan. he was with the wild animals, and angels attended him.
these are a shadow of the things that were to come; the reality, however, is found in christ.
forget someone has died
he was not seen by all the people, but by witnesses whom god had already chosen—by us who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead.
all of us also lived among them at one time, gratifying the cravings of our flesh and following its desires and thoughts. like the rest, we were by nature deserving of wrath.
we are hard pressed on every side, but not crushed; perplexed, but not in despair;
god raised him from the dead so that he will never be subject to decay. as god has said, ‘i will give you the holy and sure blessings promised to david.’
they came to philip, who was from bethsaida in galilee, with a request. "sir," they said, "we would like to see jesus."
if anyone says, "i love god," yet hates his brother, he is a liar. for anyone who does not love his brother, whom he has seen, cannot love god, whom he has not seen.
but when perfection comes, the imperfect disappears.
i do wish, brother, that i may have some benefit from you in the lord; refresh my heart in christ.
insult
[it's necessary] that [the girls] don't disobey what you have told them.
from one man he made every nation of men, that they should inhabit the whole earth; and he determined the times set for them and the exact places where they should live.
now if the ministry that brought death, which was engraved in letters on stone, came with glory, so that the israelites could not look steadily at the face of moses because of its glory, transitory though it was,
"where have you laid him?" he asked. "come and see, lord," they replied.
pace back and forth in a limited area due to restriction
abug is airborn dust from the ground.
so the man went away and began to tell in the decapolis how much jesus had done for him. and all the people were amazed.
he came and preached peace to you who were far away and peace to those who were near.
if the end of the pangi fruit is ripening, it is right for us to take [it] and eat and suck and chew the fruit off of the seed.
a fetish (for harvesting rice).
kind of fish
silt
prompted by her mother, she said, “give me here on a platter the head of john the baptist.”
teach the older men to be temperate, worthy of respect, self-controlled, and sound in faith, in love and in endurance.
measure of distance
he will be a joy and delight to you, and many will rejoice because of his birth,
put down
this is why i write these things when i am absent, that when i come i may not have to be harsh in my use of authority—the authority the lord gave me for building you up, not for tearing you down.
horns or antlers
"all this i have spoken while still with you.
he was amazed that [the child] was always crying, but in his underlying feeling, he was agitated and he was insulting the child.
where jesus, who went before us, has entered on our behalf. he has become a high priest forever, in the order of melchizedek.
scratch with claws, as a dog or chicken
so that christ may dwell in your hearts through faith. and i pray that you, being rooted and established in love,
i needed an embroidered blouse.
to temporarily satiate someone's hunger by giving some already-cooked food to eat until more rice is cooked or the meal is served
peter asked, "lord, why can't i follow you now? i will lay down my life for you."
a person with his dog pursued a pig which was wounded by a sharpened stake.
hand this man over to satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved on the day of the lord.
just as it was in the days of noah, so also will it be in the days of the son of man.
rapids of a river.
jesus answered, "if i tell you, you will not believe me, and if i asked you, you would not answer.
and all people will see god’s salvation.’”
guard
if someone scrapes bamboo with a large knife (bolo), the sound very much sets our teeth on edge.
gizzard
hide
so the soldiers, carrying out their orders, took paul with them during the night and brought him as far as antipatris.
powder/dust from woodboring insects
at the place where jesus was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one had ever been laid.
slicer
then he got into the boat and his disciples followed him.
so they shook the dust off their feet as a warning to them and went to iconium.
the man who saw it has given testimony, and his testimony is true. he knows that he tells the truth, and he testifies so that you also may believe.
to make a depression in dust or ashes by scratching or using an instrument
sea serpent or eel
when we have guests, when the food is served, we get it started [by saying], “friend, let’s eat now.” we are inviting [him] to come and eat (lit. that we-dual will eat).
but when god, who set me apart from my mother’s womb and called me by his grace, was pleased  to reveal his son in me so that i might preach him among the gentiles, my immediate response was not to consult any human being.
then the apostles returned to jerusalem from the hill called the mount of olives, a sabbath day’s walk from the city.
jesus answered him, “simon, i have something to tell you.” “tell me, teacher,” he said.
“because the patriarchs were jealous of joseph, they sold him as a slave into egypt. but god was with him
why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother’s eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye?
and he carried me away in the spirit to a mountain great and high, and showed me the holy city, jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from god.
be destroyed.
if you throw away trash, you take it to the receptacle.
rattan
make something deep
jesus sent him home, saying, "don't go into the village. "
he brother in humble circumstances ought to take pride in his high position.
as we passed to the lee of a small island called cauda, we were hardly able to make the lifeboat secure.
outsider
if someone comes for a visit from kapalong, he will have us meet him at the river junction.
no one serving as a soldier gets involved in civilian affairs--he wants to please his commanding officer.
just one person to ascend at a time.
in an attempt to escape from the ship, the sailors let the lifeboat down into the sea, pretending they were going to lower some anchors from the bow.
when jesus saw her weeping, and the jews who had come along with her also weeping, he was deeply moved in spirit and troubled.
moreover, the father judges no one, but has entrusted all judgment to the son,
when they heard this, they were amazed. so they left him and went away.
tip over
but for those who are self-seeking and who reject the truth and follow evil, there will be wrath and anger.
you
take it over there.
meat
when jesus reached the spot, he looked up and said to him, "zacchaeus, come down immediately. i must stay at your house today."
remember me; don’t forget me.
and he died for all, that those who live should no longer live for themselves but for him who died for them and was raised again.
when the trigger of the pig trap is released, a pig which has been caught.
and when she finds it, she calls her friends and neighbors together and says, 'rejoice with me; i have found my lost coin.'
then the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared to sound them.
the next day john was there again with two of his disciples.
from one man he made every nation of men, that they should inhabit the whole earth; and he determined the times set for them and the exact places where they should live.
i will show wonders in the heavens above and signs on the earth below, blood and fire and billows of smoke.
and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut out of the rock. he rolled a big stone in front of the entrance to the tomb and went away.
when ghosts try to scare us, at first they say, “mmm.” after that, they make things drop in front of us.
the birds flock together feeding on the fruits of the tree.
who were they who heard and rebelled? were they not all those moses led out of egypt?
accumulate
as peter entered the house, cornelius met him and fell at his feet in reverence.
during those days men will seek death, but will not find it; they will long to die, but death will elude them.
then i went to syria and cilicia.
fancy knife used for self-defense
bohemian waxwing bird (with feathered headdress)
cross-like symbol used to ward off spirits
it doesn’t matter how many there are
floor
whose
he/she is dizzy.
we were given a free gift of eggs.
constricted
i rejoiced greatly in the lord that at last you renewed your concern for me. indeed, you were concerned, but you had no opportunity to show it.
they devour widows' houses and for a show make lengthy prayers. such men will be punished most severely."
because joseph her husband was faithful to the law, and yet did not want to expose her to public disgrace, he had in mind to divorce her quietly.
when something haunts us, we hear many things: moaning, a child crying, or a cat or dog dragging a chain.
when the sun goes down, darkness covers the earth.
large water heron or bittern
stilts.
peeling, as the outermost layer of a kernel of corn, a bean, skin of a pig, or from flesh that was blistered
and no one after drinking old wine wants the new, for he says, 'the old is better.' "
brat
by
forget
a hoop is made of rattan which is wound in and out into a circle which is tossed to roll and is caught with a thrust of a stick as the children play.
round-about
woodpecker with red head
[speak] louder when you speak so that the others can hear
kind of fish living at the bottom of the water
stitch
yet elijah was not sent to any of them, but to a widow in zarephath in the region of sidon.
give my greetings to the brothers at laodicea, and to nympha and the church in her house.
the lord answered him, "you hypocrites! doesn't each of you on the sabbath untie his ox or donkey from the stall and lead it out to give it water?
to be disappointed.
when the teachers of the law who were pharisees saw him eating with the "sinners" and tax collectors, they asked his disciples: "why does he eat with tax collectors and 'sinners'?"
to intersect
sift
that person plays at his weeding; he doesn't stick with the task.
while they were listening to this, he went on to tell them a parable, because he was near jerusalem and the people thought that the kingdom of god was going to appear at once.
i would like you to be free from concern. an unmarried man is concerned about the lord’s affairs—how he can please the lord.
i will rescue you from your own people and from the gentiles. i am sending you to them
our agreement was changed because he forced me to pay [an extra amount].
the manipulation of childbirth is like pushing but just gently.
stray from a path
short bamboo nose flute
“but do not think i will accuse you before the father. your accuser is moses, on whom your hopes are set.
if we experience swelling that has not yet burst, our lymph nodes in the groin will hurt.
as for zeal, persecuting the church; as for legalistic righteousness, faultless.
from now on there will be five in one family divided against each other, three against two and two against three.
be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving each other, just as in christ god forgave you.
who, by the power that enables him to bring everything under his control, will transform our lowly bodies so that they will be like his glorious body.
her spirit returned, and at once she stood up. then jesus told them to give her something to eat.
‘i am the god of your fathers, the god of abraham, isaac and jacob.’ moses trembled with fear and did not dare to look.
even if they sin against you seven times in a day and seven times come back to you saying ‘i repent,’ you must forgive them.”
scoop up
upper leg joint
husbands, love your wives, just as christ loved the church and gave himself up for her
the fourth angel sounded his trumpet, and a third of the sun was struck, a third of the moon, and a third of the stars, so that a third of them turned dark. a third of the day was without light, and also a third of the night.
for just as the father raises the dead and gives them life, even so the son gives life to whom he is pleased to give it.
small hairs
to the married i give this command (not i, but the lord): a wife must not separate from her husband.
in the same way, i tell you, there is rejoicing in the presence of the angels of god over one sinner who repents."
obbiung tune and dance.
it is written in the prophets: 'they will all be taught by god.' everyone who listens to the father and learns from him comes to me.
a chicken which has laid eggs, sets [on its eggs] for fifteen days or sixteen days before [they] crack open.
she’s sassing me.
they were trampled in the winepress outside the city, and blood flowed out of the press, rising as high as the horses' bridles for a distance of 1,600 stadia.
that word ig-agpas, you rush a person so that they will quickly finish something.
river
place an order.
to saw such as for sawing wood
a kind of tree
sitting down, jesus called the twelve and said, "if anyone wants to be first, he must be the very last, and the servant of all."
but the jerusalem that is above is free, and she is our mother.
to procrastinate; prolong or to be slow to do something.
put aside or discard
however, do not rejoice that the spirits submit to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven.”
banlak went down to the sea.
a female spirit with long hair which lives in the water
float
pole for a raft
to become thin
weapon.
when it has become afternoon, we place the chicken basket on the ground and then the mother will go inside and and [her chicks] will be collected.
go downriver, especially on a raft
when he had placed his hands on them, he went on from there.
red tree fruit
his body was refreshed. he was satisfying his body in the water.
always moving, wiggly
dear friends, let us love one another, for love comes from god. everyone who loves has been born of god and knows god.
name of a river near langilan.
to get fed up
but their minds were made dull, for to this day the same veil remains when the old covenant is read. it has not been removed, because only in christ is it taken away.
though you already know all this, i want to remind you that the lord delivered his people out of egypt, but later destroyed those who did not believe.
children born not of natural descent, nor of human decision or a husband’s will, but born of god.
red mites
the soldiers planned to kill the prisoners to prevent any of them from swimming away and escaping.
there’s a pencil near you
put someone in front
to get fed up
the lord turned and looked straight at peter. then peter remembered the word the lord had spoken to him: "before the rooster crows today, you will disown me three times."
and begged him to let the sick just touch the edge of his cloak, and all who touched it were healed.
if you belong to christ, then you are abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.
sarong, skirt
i tell you the truth, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
several days later felix came with his wife drusilla, who was a jewess. he sent for paul and listened to him as he spoke about faith in christ jesus.
a hundred
woven mat for sleeping or drying grains
two hundred
knowing it was out of envy that the chief priests had handed jesus over to him.
if he is scolded, he won't let it bother him.
loosely woven, not close together
pacify
lunch
for even if i boast somewhat freely about the authority the lord gave us for building you up rather than pulling you down, i will not be ashamed of it.
gouge out a hole in something, as coconut meat from a shell or fish eyes
for i tell you that many prophets and kings wanted to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.”
plant with a stick
why did you behave like that toward your companion when he didn't have a fault to you?
after they had heard the king, they went on their way, and the star they had seen when it rose went ahead of them until it stopped over the place where the child was.  when they saw the star, they were overjoyed.
we will follow the footprints in whatever direction towards which they are pointed.
pencil sharpener.
the people are being drawn together to attend the kaamulan celebration because there are things to see.
“but so that we may not cause offense, go to the lake and throw out your line. take the first fish you catch; open its mouth and you will find a four-drachma coin. take it and give it to them for my tax and yours.”
i saw in heaven another great and marvelous sign: seven angels with the seven last plagues--last, because with them god's wrath is completed.
missing
in addition, some of our women amazed us. they went to the tomb early this morning
unable to bend knees.
a spur on the leg of a hen or rooster.
rap or tap with one’s hand or a bolo
4when i saw that they were not acting in line with the truth of the gospel, i said to peter in front of them all, "you are a jew, yet you live like a gentile and not like a jew. how is it, then, that you force gentiles to follow jewish customs?
the person whose legs are crippled, scoots forward as he moves about.
dark
elbow
but i tell you that anyone who looks at a woman lustfully has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
so was fulfilled what was spoken through the prophet: “i will open my mouth in parables, i will utter things hidden since the creation of the world.”
it’s quite improbable that this centipede will poison anyone.
and you see and hear how this fellow paul has convinced and led astray large numbers of people here in ephesus and in practically the whole province of asia. he says that man-made gods are no gods at all.
but if anyone says to you, "this has been offered in sacrifice," then do not eat it, both for the sake of the man who told you and for conscience' sake --the other man's conscience, i mean, not yours. for why should my freedom be judged by another's conscience?
they don't have time to come for a visit because they have a lot of work.
and the second is like it: ‘love your neighbor as yourself.’
the teacher who returned to maniki, they took her as far as patil as they escorted her.
the son of maath, the son of mattathias, the son of semein, the son of josek, the son of joda,
forgive, be nice to each other
now send men to joppa to bring back a man named simon who is called peter.
the outside layer of an egg including the membrane, that is the kalungon.
to be freed (from charm or spell)
hmm, so what then should we use for medicine?
when we have discovered the date which is open, we set that day for gathering together.
brothers, i urge you to bear with my word of exhortation, for i have written you only a short letter.
so the other disciples told him, "we have seen the lord!" but he said to them, "unless i see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where the nails were, and put my hand into his side, i will not believe it."
dungus is green tobacco.  it’s name is salingsing.
brothers, if i am still preaching circumcision, why am i still being persecuted? in that case the offense of the cross has been abolished.
when we fillet fish, we remove the bones.
hush up a crying baby at night.
for anyone who eats and drinks without recognizing the body of the lord eats and drinks judgment on himself.
a large herd of pigs was feeding there on the hillside. the demons begged jesus to let them go into the pigs, and he gave them permission.
after they had mocked him, they took off the robe and put his own clothes on him. then they led him away to crucify him.
each of you should use whatever gift you have received to serve others, as faithful stewards of god’s grace in its various forms.
there is a [kind of] wood which is called gisois which is ignited there by the rice so that it will be smoked.
for this reason, and because of the angels, the woman ought to have a sign of authority on her head.
then the mother of zebedee’s sons came to jesus with her sons and, kneeling down, asked a favor of him.
and then what he will ask is, [whether] if he is able to borrow one thousand [pesos], if perhaps he will charge interest
they cooked here under the house
second; day after tomorrow
heat water
lazy
wild chicken
even though father agree to it; i won’t.
singe
praise be to the god and father of our lord jesus christ, the father of compassion and the god of all comfort,
very early in the morning
to inadvertently interrupt something or someone
then jesus went around teaching from village to village. calling the twelve to him, he sent them out two by two and gave them authority over evil spirits.
we will be able to fil upl [our baskets] when harvesting.
nipa palm before it is cut
to intentionally unravel something
but when they arrest you, do not worry about what to say or how to say it. at that time you will be given what to say,
smother
besides everything else, i face daily the pressure of my concern for all the churches.
8finally, brothers, whatever is true, whatever is noble, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable--if anything is excellent or praiseworthy--think about such things.
to grate
take the floor apart
they discussed this among themselves and said, “it is because we didn’t bring any bread.”
false,
nymph stage of cicada
(as it is written in the law of the lord, “every firstborn male is to be consecrated to the lord”),
the fifth angel poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast, and its kingdom was plunged into darkness. people gnawed their tongues in agony
clamp together
correct
guarantee
"do you speak greek?" he replied. "aren't you the egyptian who started a revolt and led four thousand terrorists out into the desert some time ago?"
but jesus remained silent. the high priest said to him, “i charge you under oath by the living god: tell us if you are the messiah, the son of god.”
no one serving as a soldier gets involved in civilian affairs--he wants to please his commanding officer.
is this our chicken?
long, tall
then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their father. whoever has ears, let them hear.
particles of food between one's teeth
fill up the basket with rice.
and he overthrew seven nations in canaan, giving their land to his people as their inheritance.
thus the saying ‘one sows and another reaps’ is true.
igì’s middle finger was inadvertently cut off
let us not become conceited, provoking and envying each other.
what is this person who cheats? just a thief by whom we are being deliberately cheated.
left over rice from planting
just one betelnut on a palm tree.
place
[it will] possibly be one week. [it will] possibly be two weeks.
“i am the gate; whoever enters through me will be saved. they will come in and go out, and find pasture.”
when he looks at me, he sees the one who sent me.
my brothers, some from chloe's household have informed me that there are quarrels among you.
now his only work is to do the singeing.
however, each one of you also must love his wife as he loves himself, and the wife must respect her husband.
to choose or pick out from other objects or people.
to untie (as shoes or an animal)
but rejoice that you participate in the sufferings of christ, so that you may be overjoyed when his glory is revealed.
he said to them, "how foolish you are, and how slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken!
in front of
when we taste it and we can discern that the flavor of the broth of the pig is just right , it has become flavorful.
those in sulit, langilan, banuwaloy, kapugi, and pipisan, that is the word they use.
jesus answered, "do you think that these galileans were worse sinners than all the other galileans because they suffered this way?
we split or open up the notched pula palm log and then we see many grubs which are squirming.
the honey bees patiukan, tamo-ing tamusan and the wasps tabu-uan, lapinid, baga-baga, all have grubs. those are their offspring.
so be on your guard; i have told you everything ahead of time
immediately jesus knew in his spirit that this was what they were thinking in their hearts, and he said to them, "why are you thinking these things?
the sun is setting when it goes past the mountain as it is disappearing over the horizon.
for david did not ascend to heaven, and yet he said, ‘the lord said to my lord: “sit at my right hand
“their throats are open graves; their tongues practice deceit.” “the poison of vipers is on their lips.”
indeed
then the church throughout judea, galilee and samaria enjoyed a time of peace and was strengthened. living in the fear of the lord and encouraged by the holy spirit, it increased in numbers.
he didn't allow [him] to take half of those piglets.
the seventy-two returned with joy and said, “lord, even the demons submit to us in your name.”
he listened to paul as he was speaking. paul looked directly at him, saw that he had faith to be healed
after this, jesus went out and saw a tax collector by the name of levi sitting at his tax booth. “follow me,” jesus said to him
lamp soot
sunset
wear sandals but not an extra tunic.
and then what he will ask is, [whether] if he is able to borrow one thousand [pesos], if perhaps he will charge interest
paul said, “john’s baptism was a baptism of repentance. he told the people to believe in the one coming after him, that is, in jesus.”
"do not be afraid, little flock, for your father has been pleased to give you the kingdom.
after taking the cup, he gave thanks and said, "take this and divide it among you.
but who are you, a human being, to talk back to god? “shall what is formed say to the one who formed it, ‘why did you make me like this?’”
“come,” he said. then peter got down out of the boat, walked on the water and came toward jesus.
chicken
the king rose, and with him the governor and bernice and those sitting with them.
but paul shouted, "don't harm yourself! we are all here!"
we owe a whole sack.
“martha, martha,” the lord answered, “you are worried and upset about many things,
he has delivered us from such a deadly peril, and he will deliver us. on him we have set our hope that he will continue to deliver us,
war dance with spear and shield.
while pilate was sitting on the judge’s seat, his wife sent him this message: “don’t have anything to do with that innocent man, for i have suffered a great deal today in a dream because of him.”
so the chief priests made plans to kill lazarus as well,
when someone pounds rice, many rice [grains] fly out of the mortar as a result of our striking [them with the pestle].
shake out, as a rug or a flour sack
ambush (children's game of raiders)
on herod’s birthday the daughter of herodias danced for the guests and pleased herod so much
i wept and wept because no one was found who was worthy to open the scroll or look inside.
peace to the brothers, and love with faith from god the father and the lord jesus christ.
if anyone does not love the lord--a curse be on him. come, o lord !
he said to them, "when you pray, say: " 'father, hallowed be your name, your kingdom come.
dropped
peter said to jesus, "rabbi, it is good for us to be here. let us put up three shelters--one for you, one for moses and one for elijah."
the light of a lamp will never shine in you again. the voice of bridegroom and bride will never be heard in you again. your merchants were the world's great men. by your magic spell all the nations were led astray.
to drop off
to inadvertently bump or clink something together so they make a clinking or clanging sound
magnet.
i plan to do so when i go to spain. i hope to visit you while passing through and to have you assist me on my journey there, after i have enjoyed your company for a while.
they were terrified and asked each other, "who is this? even the wind and the waves obey him!"
carrying his own cross, he went out to the place of the skull (which in aramaic is called golgotha).
it drips through the pot.
tiny switch of pig’s hair worn on tayun.
great crowds came to him, bringing the lame, the blind, the crippled, the mute and many others, and laid them at his feet; and he healed them.
remove clothing; go naked
moved by the spirit, he went into the temple courts. when the parents brought in the child jesus to do for him what the custom of the law required,
for the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard.
begin; starting point
the disciples did not understand any of this. its meaning was hidden from them, and they did not know what he was talking about.
for moses said, 'honor your father and your mother,' and, 'anyone who curses his father or mother must be put to death.'
you too should be on your guard against him, because he strongly opposed our message.
then the people began to plead with jesus to leave their region.
so when the samaritans came to him, they urged him to stay with them, and he stayed two days.
stand up
resist him, standing firm in the faith, because you know that your brothers throughout the world are undergoing the same kind of sufferings.
may the god who gives endurance and encouragement give you the same attitude of mind toward each other that christ jesus had,
brothers, pray for us
“and about judgment, because the prince of this world now stands condemned.”
if we are taken by suprise that a person falls over and goes ahead [and] dies, that is [the meaning of] falling over dead.
so be on your guard! remember that for three years i never stopped warning each of you night and day with tears.
blink
a year ago
pace back and forth in a limited area due to restriction
spine, vertebrae
happen
then jesus replied, "have i not chosen you, the twelve? yet one of you is a devil!"
so he called ten of his servants and gave them ten minas. 'put this money to work,' he said, 'until i come back.'
ashes
my feet did not touch the cement.
i gave you milk, not solid food, for you were not yet ready for it. indeed, you are still not ready.
first he said, "sacrifices and offerings, burnt offerings and sin offerings you did not desire, nor were you pleased with them" (although the law required them to be made).
the monkey has made up to people.
too full
all these are the beginning of birth pains.
attach
the flesh and bones of the tail of animals or reptiles.
be always on the watch, and pray that you may be able to escape all that is about to happen, and that you may be able to stand before the son of man."
second; day after tomorrow
toptop “even” [means] that which measures exactly the same; neither is longer [than the other].
the person who has a kuglung instrument gets a string made from the philidendra.
take someone's place
rush someone
the disciples went and woke him, saying, “lord, save us! we’re going to drown!”
who shall separate us from the love of christ? shall trouble or hardship or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword?
thicken, as rice gruel
collar bone.
when you sin against them in this way and wound their weak conscience, you sin against christ.
if a woman does not cover her head, she should have her hair cut off; and if it is a disgrace for a woman to have her hair cut or shaved off, she should cover her head.
but we ought always to thank god for you, brothers and sisters loved by the lord, because god chose you as firstfruits to be saved through the sanctifying work of the spirit and through belief in the truth.
a piece
i hope in the lord jesus to send timothy to you soon, that i also may be cheered when i receive news about you.
when there is a wedding feast, and if there are some who are lacking rice (lit. food), we add to the rice for those who had insufficient.
some time ago theudas appeared, claiming to be somebody, and about four hundred men rallied to him. he was killed, all his followers were dispersed, and it all came to nothing.
the city was laid out like a square, as long as it was wide. he measured the city with the rod and found it to be 12,000 stadia in length, and as wide and high as it is long.
it isn't fair that the food is being consumed so we won't have enough because someone takes a huge fistful of rice.
but we preach christ crucified: a stumbling block to jews and foolishness to gentiles,
after they had mocked him, they took off the robe and put his own clothes on him. then they led him away to crucify him.
a wave or breaker
while peter was wondering about the meaning of the vision, the men sent by cornelius found out where simon’s house was and stopped at the gate.
even though i may not be an apostle to others, surely i am to you! for you are the seal of my apostleship in the lord.
pinworm
until i come, devote yourself to the public reading of scripture, to preaching and to teaching.
you know that everyone in the province of asia has deserted me, including phygelus and hermogenes.
for it is we who are the circumcision, we who serve god by his spirit, who boast in christ jesus, and who put no confidence in the flesh—
when his accusers got up to speak, they did not charge him with any of the crimes i had expected.
i want you to know how much i am struggling for you and for those at laodicea, and for all who have not met me personally.
then judas iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief priests to betray jesus to them.
fold up
bring along
algae or moss on trees or water
large forest spider
two women will be grinding with a hand mill; one will be taken and the other left.
another reason i wrote you was to see if you would stand the test and be obedient in everything.
jesus said, "for judgment i have come into this world, so that the blind will see and those who see will become blind."
the inside of a dug-out canoe is hollowed out as it is made.
host
if someone has become widowed and for three days has not been able to go out [of the house] (lit. walk), we get a piece of cloth/clothing by which we signify that it is ok now for you to run errands as this clothing is what i use to release you because i have decided to release [you].
thomas said to him, “lord, we don’t know where you are going, so how can we know the way?”
when we make a [shallow] well, we put sand in it so that the debris will be filtered out.
it’s stained already.
to pump
on hearing of this, john's disciples came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.
when we cross a river, if we cannot locate a shallow place because the water is foaming, we will be swept into deep water.
and he will reign over jacob’s descendants forever; his kingdom will never end.”
will fail to receive a hundred times as much in this present age (homes, brothers, sisters, mothers, children and fields--and with them, persecutions) and in the age to come, eternal life.
and david says: “may their table become a snare and a trap, a stumbling block and a retribution for them.
word used to shoo dogs.
do not work for food that spoils, but for food that endures to eternal life, which the son of man will give you. on him god the father has placed his seal of approval."
“you have answered correctly,” jesus replied. “do this and you will live.”
lean over
and to the disciple, "here is your mother." from that time on, this disciple took her into his home.
then their eyes were opened and they recognized him, and he disappeared from their sight.
when we ride a jeep from valencia, when we get to baguntaas , it is halfway to nasuli. that is the halfway point of the ride.
“he will bring those wretches to a wretched end,” they replied, “and he will rent the vineyard to other tenants, who will give him his share of the crop at harvest time.”
shadow
they moved to maambago because they had made a new airstrip.
a hole in a tree or stump in which water gathers, used as a drinking hole by animals and people.
aware of their discussion, jesus asked, “you of little faith, why are you talking among yourselves about having no bread?
when they came to jesus, they saw the man who had been possessed by the legion of demons, sitting there, dressed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
guavano
suckle
raider; to go on a raid.
a kind of long, tubular snail shell used for making lime.
embankment
beginning
for when one says, “i follow paul,” and another, “i follow apollos,” are you not mere human beings?
for titus not only welcomed our appeal, but he is coming to you with much enthusiasm and on his own initiative.
hit the chicken on the head with a death blow.
a person with his dog pursued a pig which was wounded by a sharpened stake.
no one has ever gone into heaven except the one who came from heaven—the son of man.
include
we also call the inside of this building roomy.
someone gave me a letter. that person whom i knew said, “i'm sending a message please that i will travel upriver to maambago.”
a person who is catching crabs with his/her hands, lifts the rocks off so that he/she can pick up the crab(s).
many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us,
by faith he left egypt, not fearing the king's anger; he persevered because he saw him who is invisible.
at the time of the banquet he sent his servant to tell those who had been invited, 'come, for everything is now ready.'
lightweight
burrow made by a person or animal
estimate the length.
the teachers of the law and the chief priests looked for a way to arrest him immediately, because they knew he had spoken this parable against them. but they were afraid of the people.
even though we warned [that person] not to go to his field to fetch something for them to eat because there was a strong warning, he went anyway and was hit by the raiders. he was shot.
smell of burning hair or flesh
the membrane encases the white of the egg. and the white of the egg surrounds the yoke.
thumping/dripping sound
the second woe has passed; the third woe is coming soon.
that disease will be transmitted if we lay side by side with a person who has the alap-ap white skin fungal disease.
he at once took some officers and soldiers and ran down to the crowd. when the rioters saw the commander and his soldiers, they stopped beating paul.
to leave behind in someone's care, especially of a child
it is written: 'and he was numbered with the transgressors' ; and i tell you that this must be fulfilled in me. yes, what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment."
black
peacemakers who sow in peace raise a harvest of righteousness.
then jesus said to him, “get up! pick up your mat and walk.”
the water of a side channel flows through and joins  the body [of the river].  it is called the junction of the rivers.
the son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘here is a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.’ but wisdom is proved right by her deeds.”
now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: "the one i kiss is the man; arrest him and lead him away under guard."
the cob of the corn, it is its stem on the inside [of the ear of corn].
wake up! strengthen what remains and is about to die, for i have found your deeds unfinished in the sight of my god.
but if i drive out demons by the finger of god, then the kingdom of god has come to you.
unobstructed
any bird of prey including hawks/eagles and nocturnal owls
and abraham gave him a tenth of everything. first, his name means "king of righteousness"; then also, "king of salem" means "king of peace."
for example, if someone is getting married, the only thing they will be discussing is how much brideprice they will give up front for that girl.
so he said to the man who took care of the vineyard, 'for three years now i've been coming to look for fruit on this fig tree and haven't found any. cut it down! why should it use up the soil?'
sediment free
then agrippa said to paul, "do you think that in such a short time you can persuade me to be a christian?"
so then, if she has sexual relations with another man while her husband is still alive, she is called an adulteress. but if her husband dies, she is released from that law and is not an adulteress if she marries another man.
he came to that which was his own, but his own did not receive him.
having lost all sensitivity, they have given themselves over to sensuality so as to indulge in every kind of impurity, with a continual lust for more.
when the wine was gone, jesus’ mother said to him, “they have no more wine.”
attraction
“you have heard that it was said, ‘love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’
“i am the gate; whoever enters through me will be saved. they will come in and go out, and find pasture.”
scraps of material, paper, or mat material
he replied, “it is not right to take the children’s bread and toss it to the dogs.”
thus, by their fruit you will recognize them.
a tree that is being felled makes a loud cracking sound as it falls over.
to massacre; to die or perish as of many
when the flooded [river] water has receeded, the thickness of the silt is a handspan deep.
it does not, therefore, depend on human desire or effort, but on god’s mercy.
the words "once more" indicate the removing of what can be shaken--that is, created things--so that what cannot be shaken may remain.
hummingbird
really
a mother leaves rice behind for gruel to be fed to her child.
as soon as judas took the bread, satan entered into him.
besides everything else, i face daily the pressure of my concern for all the churches.
but it was solomon who built a house for him.
a hat
now the hand of the lord is against you. you are going to be blind for a time, not even able to see the light of the sun.” immediately mist and darkness came over him, and he groped about, seeking someone to lead him by the hand.
if not, what did you go out to see? a man dressed in fine clothes? no, those who wear fine clothes are in kings’ palaces.
every; until the time of
many people with no authority
clay pot
we have a mother who is already old who is a widow.  the children are the ones to watch over [her] to make sure to help her when she has needs.
you say, “food for the stomach and the stomach for food, and god will destroy them both.” the body, however, is not meant for sexual immorality but for the lord, and the lord for the body.
uzziah the father of jotham, jotham the father of ahaz, ahaz the father of hezekiah,
when he saw peter and john about to go into the temple, he asked them for money.
sleep together (as husband and wife)
small, tiny
when the river floods, it rains for one night and then the entire riverbed is underwater.
people of the umayan river area.
when they have become married, he will perform a cerimony to remove the charm which he placed [on her] so that his wife's thinking will become normal again.
to have social dealings or business with
go down
brothers and sisters, my heart’s desire and prayer to god for the israelites is that they may be saved.
tarp
the city does not need the sun or the moon to shine on it, for the glory of god gives it light, and the lamb is its lamp.
for i will give you words and wisdom that none of your adversaries will be able to resist or contradict.
his followers mocked him so they were changed into trees.
kind of hornbill
breath
everyone who does evil hates the light, and will not come into the light for fear that their deeds will be exposed.
possibly
to dribble saliva, drool.
taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke the loaves. then he gave them to his disciples to set before the people. he also divided the two fish among them all.
the whole city was aroused, and the people came running from all directions. seizing paul, they dragged him from the temple, and immediately the gates were shut.
it’s a improbable that we will obtain horses since we’re women.
edible beach plant
our understanding [of the meaning] is uncluttered, straight and clear.
to soak in water.
if you are the owner of a sack of corn which you will divide in half, you will give half of it.
the liver wasn’t cooked by boiling in water lest it would fall apart.
when his parents saw him, they were astonished. his mother said to him, “son, why have you treated us like this? your father and i have been anxiously searching for you.”
undeveloped fetus in a miscarriage
if anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not take him into your house or welcome him.
and if anyone wants to sue you and take your shirt, hand over your coat as well.
consequently, just as one trespass resulted in condemnation for all people, so also one righteous act resulted in justification and life for all people.
"but before all this, they will lay hands on you and persecute you. they will deliver you to synagogues and prisons, and you will be brought before kings and governors, and all on account of my name.
the man in the loincloth carried that child under his arm.
if there is stinging medicine which we spread on our bodies, our skin smart.
meanwhile a large crowd of jews found out that jesus was there and came, not only because of him but also to see lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.
but he refused. instead, he went off and had the man thrown into prison until he could pay the debt.
“why wasn’t this perfume sold and the money given to the poor? it was worth a year’s wages.”
whoever does not love does not know god, because god is love.
many testified falsely against him, but their statements did not agree
“i baptize you with water for repentance. but after me comes one who is more powerful than i, whose sandals i am not worthy to carry. he will baptize you with the holy spirit and fire.
we test a person to see if his conduct is good.patogkaran nu.
originate
quit talking because i am getting fed up with you, and i will have to get back at you.
go to leaf and not bear fruit
when the lamb opened the second seal, i heard the second living creature say, “come!”
to side-step something such as an order.
the black thunderheads, if they become white, they will cause it to rain hard.
if you point these things out to the brothers and sisters, you will be a good minister of christ jesus, nourished on the truths of the faith and of the good teaching that you have followed.
if anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not take him into your house or welcome him.
suppose a man comes into your meeting wearing a gold ring and fine clothes, and a poor man in shabby clothes also comes in.
he thought to himself, 'what shall i do? i have no place to store my crops.'
to be carried by the bubbling current
he was holding a little scroll, which lay open in his hand. he planted his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the land,
at once i was in the spirit, and there before me was a throne in heaven with someone sitting on it.
if you are in doubt about your companions, you make them smaller in your hearts.
(unclear entry - possibly incomplete)
you who say that people should not commit adultery, do you commit adultery? you who abhor idols, do you rob temples?
we will warm ourselves by a fire if we are chilled.
and now, dear lady, i am not writing you a new command but one we have had from the beginning. i ask that we love one another.
i credited your horse first and then the [word] collect [means] that you will ask about the payment for your horse.
a kind of wild banana
who are [those] people who have just passed by?” they replied, “we have come from kapugi no du-on tu-ud noy diò to patil.”
if anyone says anything to you, say that the lord needs them, and he will send them right away.”
eat anything that normally is cooked, i.e. rice.
therefore, remember that formerly you who are gentiles by birth and called “uncircumcised” by those who call themselves “the circumcision” (which is done in the body by human hands)—
we are not able to understand
to move about (as unborn piglets)
hodgepodge mixture, as in salad
meanwhile, the high priest questioned jesus about his disciples and his teaching.
a divider
expand as a flower; widen as an opening, enlarge, spread, burst forth as sunshine
he told the crowd to sit down on the ground. when he had taken the seven loaves and given thanks, he broke them and gave them to his disciples to set before the people, and they did so.
without weakening in his faith, he faced the fact that his body was as good as dead—since he was about a hundred years old—and that sarah’s womb was also dead.
but we sailed from philippi after the festival of unleavened bread, and five days later joined the others at troas, where we stayed seven days.
then peter said, “surely no one can stand in the way of their being baptized with water. they have received the holy spirit just as we have.”
mosquito.
do i mean then that a sacrifice offered to an idol is anything, or that an idol is anything?
docking place
he said in a loud voice, “fear god and give him glory, because the hour of his judgment has come. worship him who made the heavens, the earth, the sea and the springs of water.”
always making noise (as with a jew’s harp)
wash them right away.
command those who are rich in this present world not to be arrogant nor to put their hope in wealth, which is so uncertain, but to put their hope in god, who richly provides us with everything for our enjoyment.
“which of these three do you think was a neighbor to the man who fell into the hands of robbers?”
after he said this, he was taken up before their very eyes, and a cloud hid him from their sight.
by faith joseph, when his end was near, spoke about the exodus of the israelites from egypt and gave instructions about his bones.
so he became as much superior to the angels as the name he has inherited is superior to theirs.
we are not able to understand
two other men, both criminals, were also led out with him to be executed.
the next day, since the commander wanted to find out exactly why paul was being accused by the jews, he released him and ordered the chief priests and all the sanhedrin to assemble. then he brought paul and had him stand before them.
his fellow servant fell to his knees and begged him, ‘be patient with me, and i will pay it back.’
i will just be the one from whom you will collect payment
this
when god made his promise to abraham, since there was no one greater for him to swear by, he swore by himself,
to dip or create a valley.
the flavor is the same because it is astringent.
now herod had arrested john and bound him and put him in prison because of herodias, his brother philip’s wife,  for john had been saying to him: “it is not lawful for you to have her.”  herod wanted to kill john, but he was afraid of the people, because they considered him a prophet.
first, you call [the sleeping person]. if he doesn't sense it we take hold of him so that he will be disturbed from sleep.
confident of your obedience, i write to you, knowing that you will do even more than i ask.
therefore jesus said again, “very truly i tell you, i am the gate for the sheep.”
for all the prophets and the law prophesied until john.
while he was speaking, a cloud appeared and covered them, and they were afraid as they entered the cloud.
for you were once darkness, but now you are light in the lord. live as children of light
let us not become conceited, provoking and envying each other.
finger (of a person)
he and all his family were devout and god-fearing; he gave generously to those in need and prayed to god regularly.
who of you by worrying can add a single hour to his life ?
when jesus heard what had happened, he withdrew by boat privately to a solitary place. hearing of this, the crowds followed him on foot from the towns.
a person has a circular growth of hair on his head which makes a swirl.
this is indeed a python.
consent to marriage
dishevelled, as cord or thread
so i will always remind you of these things, even though you know them and are firmly established in the truth you now have.
the abu-on is a large bird which lives is the forest.
round, curved, whole piece
remember this: whoever turns a sinner from the error of his way will save him from death and cover over a multitude of sins.
i will recover my knife when my corn is sold.
type of inedible cane, large
to be able to manage the current without being carried away by it
cracked
commend someone on their good behavior.
antidote
a buck.
joaquin cannot manage to resolve this problem because it is very difficult.
[the expression] doesn't mean that one's love is lacking, it refers to [the fact that] a someone feels very sad
chin
deceive
hard shell
so he got up from the meal, took off his outer clothing, and wrapped a towel around his waist.
peel off layers from something, as onions or banana stalk
but if it is from god, you will not be able to stop these men; you will only find yourselves fighting against god.”
someone told him, “your mother and brothers are standing outside, wanting to speak to you.”
is hanging down.
you
in my former book, theophilus, i wrote about all that jesus began to do and to teach  until the day he was taken up to heaven, after giving instructions through the holy spirit to the apostles he had chosen.
the law is not based on faith; on the contrary, it says, “the person who does these things will live by them.”
every day i was with you, teaching in the temple courts, and you did not arrest me. but the scriptures must be fulfilled."
the new rolled up leaf of the taro plant is good as a vegetable.
nothing
remove what is caught from a trap
cornfield
the beginning of the gospel about jesus christ, the son of god.
to slander no one, to be peaceable and considerate, and to show true humility toward all men.
are you greater than our father jacob, who gave us the well and drank from it himself, as did also his sons and his livestock?”
mix different kinds together
those were the animals god forbade them to eat.
then i was told, “you must prophesy again about many peoples, nations, languages and kings.”
then the angel took the censer, filled it with fire from the altar, and hurled it on the earth; and there came peals of thunder, rumblings, flashes of lightning and an earthquake.
to quit some activity
(all the athenians and the foreigners who lived there spent their time doing nothing but talking about and listening to the latest ideas.)
shame on you who leave your companions behind.
what jesus did here in cana of galilee was the first of the signs through which he revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him.
“i have spoken openly to the world,” jesus replied. “i always taught in synagogues or at the temple, where all the jews come together. i said nothing in secret.”
then the church throughout judea, galilee and samaria enjoyed a time of peace and was strengthened. living in the fear of the lord and encouraged by the holy spirit, it increased in numbers.
the beginning of the gospel about jesus christ, the son of god.
they risked their lives for me. not only i but all the churches of the gentiles are grateful to them.
follow a scent
i'll have something given to me.
at the same time he was hoping that paul would offer him a bribe, so he sent for him frequently and talked with him.
circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing. keeping god’s commands is what counts.
but they were kept from recognizing him.
share
we were surprised at amutatoy.
but to those whom god has called, both jews and greeks, christ the power of god and the wisdom of god.
(the pharisees and all the jews do not eat unless they give their hands a ceremonial washing, holding to the tradition of the elders.
i saw none of the other apostles—only james, the lord’s brother.
donghuan was scared to death because he was thinking, “i will probably be eaten by this big python.”
lay a body “in state”
jesus answered, “how can the guests of the bridegroom mourn while he is with them? the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; then they will fast.
there in front of him was a man suffering from dropsy.
fork or anything sharp with is poked into something
type of tulaang
if the rice is rained on, it will be ruined.
newly sprouted baby teeth of an animal
these are the twelve he appointed: simon (to whom he gave the name peter);
for i have come down from heaven not to do my will but to do the will of him who sent me.
i myself am convinced, my brothers, that you yourselves are full of goodness, complete in knowledge and competent to instruct one another.
because joseph her husband was faithful to the law, and yet did not want to expose her to public disgrace, he had in mind to divorce her quietly.
"now i know that none of you among whom i have gone about preaching the kingdom will ever see me again.
right here
when a child walks as he is playing and lifts his foot above his waist, his legs are also spread apart.
“it has been said, ‘anyone who divorces his wife must give her a certificate of divorce.’
what then? what the people of israel sought so earnestly they did not obtain. the elect among them did, but the others were hardened,
pay attention
we’ll use the bolo to cut off the wood
yesterday is the day which has just passed.
to be together; next to each other
to obstruct (a path or one's view)
going on from there, he saw two other brothers, james son of zebedee and his brother john. they were in a boat with their father zebedee, preparing their nets. jesus called them,
black and white striped wild mongoose.
fain
we’re cutting our fields now.
wherever there is a carcass, there the vultures will gather.
jesus stepped into a boat, crossed over and came to his own town.
diagram
his disciples answered, "but where in this remote place can anyone get enough bread to feed them?"
if there is mucus, he will blow it out.
grunt
ninth
maggot eggs.
the tree broke and fell over because it was rotten.
to draw towards oneself, hold on to, guard jealously as of newlyweds, children, food.
next
to come into clear view.
give each other a friendship name
as they talked and discussed these things with each other, jesus himself came up and walked along with them;
when he saw it, he was amazed at the sight. as he went over to get a closer look, he heard the lord say:
what i am carrying suspended is lightweight.
refuse to eat, drink or move
don’t go alone, because there are many raiders.
if we are teaching a child, he is quick to understand.
two or more people shoot with arrows or plunge spears into a pig or chicken to insure its deaths.
raise
marmot's mound
‘nine hundred gallons of olive oil,’ he replied. the manager told him, ‘take your bill, sit down quickly, and make it four hundred and fifty.’
stomachache
fret of an instrument
and they said many other insulting things to him.
the wild pigs escape.
to deceive.
with respect to sayote vegetable in the refrigerator, if it becomes thin and has shrunk, it is said to be shriveled.
some of the teachers of the law responded, "well said, teacher!"
just as they were handed down to us by those who from the first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word.
greedy
can both fresh water and salt water flow from the same spring?
if we make a waterhole on the beach, we place sand there so that the debris will be filtered out.
so i thought it necessary to urge the brothers to visit you in advance and finish the arrangements for the generous gift you had promised. then it will be ready as a generous gift, not as one grudgingly given.
but they remained silent. so taking hold of the man, he healed him and sent him away.
nearby stood six stone water jars, the kind used by the jews for ceremonial washing, each holding from twenty to thirty gallons.
here is a trustworthy saying: if we died with him, we will also live with him;
i am the bread of life.
the wind blows wherever it pleases. you hear its sound, but you cannot tell where it comes from or where it is going. so it is with everyone born of the spirit.”
then he put his hands on her, and immediately she straightened up and praised god.
seed
it is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile; it is thrown out. "he who has ears to hear, let him hear."
and abraham gave him a tenth of everything. first, his name means "king of righteousness"; then also, "king of salem" means "king of peace."
"his master replied, 'i will judge you by your own words, you wicked servant! you knew, did you, that i am a hard man, taking out what i did not put in, and reaping what i did not sow?
she went and told those who had been with him and who were mourning and weeping.
headband
turn or rotate
finished
then peter said, “silver or gold i do not have, but what i do have i give you. in the name of jesus christ of nazareth, walk.”
peter went down and said to the men, “i’m the one you’re looking for. why have you come?”
turn the radio down.
his emotions (lit breath) were disturbed by those who were just making [false] accusations. we were taken by surprise because we had not been asked [about it].
if we often get [these kind of] swellings, we are very much afflicted with blind boils.
he jumped to his feet and began to walk. then he went with them into the temple courts, walking and jumping, and praising god.
even though there are difficulties in our life situations, yet we just trust them to god.
god also testified to it by signs, wonders and various miracles, and by gifts of the holy spirit distributed according to his will.
where for forty days he was tempted by the devil. he ate nothing during those days, and at the end of them he was hungry.
young.
when someone has just begun to harvest, other people cannot go there because the harvesters will suffer the negative result of being interrupted and become ill.
so that christ may dwell in your hearts through faith. and i pray that you, being rooted and established in love,
they kept looking for jesus, and as they stood in the temple area they asked one another, "what do you think? isn't he coming to the feast at all?"
for what the law was powerless to do because it was weakened by the flesh, god did by sending his own son in the likeness of sinful flesh to be a sin offering. and so he condemned sin in the flesh,
[speak] louder when you speak so that the others can hear
sharpened stake which is used as a lever
blind
he was delivered over to death for our sins and was raised to life for our justification.
the first angel sounded his trumpet, and there came hail and fire mixed with blood, and it was hurled down upon the earth. a third of the earth was burned up, a third of the trees were burned up, and all the green grass was burned up.
make up to or become friends with people
small abaca-harvesting knife.
but when jesus turned and looked at his disciples, he rebuked peter. "get behind me, satan!" he said. "you do not have in mind the things of god, but the things of men."
eighty
tell a story
give to everyone what you owe them: if you owe taxes, pay taxes; if revenue, then revenue; if respect, then respect; if honor, then honor.
now we who have believed enter that rest, just as god has said, "so i declared on oath in my anger, 'they shall never enter my rest.' "
one meal.
a kind of sugarcane.
safety pin
you are all children of the light and children of the day. we do not belong to the night or to the darkness.
therefore encourage one another and build each other up, just as in fact you are doing.
for everyone who asks receives; he who seeks finds; and to him who knocks, the door will be opened.
confess
knowing their thoughts, jesus said, “why do you entertain evil thoughts in your hearts?
to become hard or firm
but christ is faithful as the son over god’s house. and we are his house, if indeed we hold firmly to our confidence and the hope in which we glory.
but jesus knew their hypocrisy. "why are you trying to trap me?" he asked. "bring me a denarius and let me look at it." they brought the coin, and he asked them, "whose portrait is this? and whose inscription?" "caesar's," they replied.
while jesus was teaching in the temple courts, he asked, "how is it that the teachers of the law say that the christ is the son of david?
delicious
tired of doing
airport.
who had come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. those troubled by impure spirits were cured,
they show that the requirements of the law are written on their hearts, their consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts sometimes accusing them and at other times even defending them.)
they were terrified and asked each other, "who is this? even the wind and the waves obey him!"
to be alert and energetic
a vine for hair growth
a man in the crowd answered, "teacher, i brought you my son, who is possessed by a spirit that has robbed him of speech.
ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you.
"be careful," jesus warned them. "watch out for the yeast of the pharisees and that of herod."
for if men do these things when the tree is green, what will happen when it is dry?"
as for aluminum roofing which is very thin, it easily becomes dented when we step on it as we are using it to make a roof.
word
pinch someone’s cheeks
eyelashes.
he did it to demonstrate his righteousness at the present time, so as to be just and the one who justifies those who have faith in jesus.
reply
i will not let them return home
if you won't take care [of the children], search for something to eat!
lack love
"tell us by what authority you are doing these things," they said. "who gave you this authority?"
male monkey
woven mat for sleeping or drying grains
on the eighth day, when it was time to circumcise the child, he was named jesus, the name the angel had given him before he was conceived.
die
masters, provide your slaves with what is right and fair, because you know that you also have a master in heaven.
when i planned this, did i do it lightly? or do i make my plans in a worldly manner so that in the same breath i say, "yes, yes" and "no, no"?
he/she insulted [someone] because he had not yet
i myself did not know him, but the reason i came baptizing with water was that he might be revealed to israel.”
as it was in the days of noah, so it will be at the coming of the son of man.
wherever the first wound was, that is where one will repeat the action of spearing.
knotted rattan used as a calendar or appointment reminder
as soon as it was night, the believers sent paul and silas away to berea. on arriving there, they went to the jewish synagogue.
when they came to the border of mysia, they tried to enter bithynia, but the spirit of jesus would not allow them to.
at the time that [she] fell, it was five o’clock in the afternoon.
then he turned toward the woman and said to simon, “do you see this woman? i came into your house. you did not give me any water for my feet, but she wet my feet with her tears and wiped them with her hair.
as soon as judas had taken the bread, he went out. and it was night.
i said, “so how many hundred [pesos] is your horse?”
intercept
for though i am absent from you in body, i am present with you in spirit and delight to see how disciplined you are and how firm your faith in christ is.
so that, just as sin reigned in death, so also grace might reign through righteousness to bring eternal life through jesus christ our lord.
even one of their own prophets has said, "cretans are always liars, evil brutes, lazy gluttons."
now those who had been scattered by the persecution that broke out when stephen was killed traveled as far as phoenicia, cyprus and antioch, spreading the word only among jews.
bamboo eel trap
god made him who had no sin to be sin for us, so that in him we might become the righteousness of god.
unlike the other high priests, he does not need to offer sacrifices day after day, first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people. he sacrificed for their sins once for all when he offered himself.
“i am one who testifies for myself; my other witness is the father, who sent me.”
accept one another, then, just as christ accepted you, in order to bring praise to god.
the next day, when they came down from the mountain, a large crowd met him.
“to the angel of the church in philadelphia write: these are the words of him who is holy and true, who holds the key of david. what he opens no one can shut, and what he shuts no one can open.
fat
why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother’s eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye?
flourish
payow leaves are put on.
large
without father or mother, without genealogy, without beginning of days or end of life, like the son of god he remains a priest forever.
wide clearing
my camote has been scraped.
jesus answered, “don’t you know me, philip, even after i have been among you such a long time? anyone who has seen me has seen the father. how can you say, ‘show us the father’?”
to draw near, close together
you brood of vipers, how can you who are evil say anything good? for the mouth speaks what the heart is full of.
“remain in me, as i also remain in you. no branch can bear fruit by itself; it must remain in the vine. neither can you bear fruit unless you remain in me.”
don’t you know that when you offer yourselves to someone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one you obey—whether you are slaves to sin, which leads to death, or to obedience, which leads to righteousness?
the ground is sloping.
“king agrippa, i consider myself fortunate to stand before you today as i make my defense against all the accusations of the jews,
then paul and barnabas answered them boldly: “we had to speak the word of god to you first. since you reject it and do not consider yourselves worthy of eternal life, we now turn to the gentiles.
reject something as being too small or insufficient
he called out to them, “friends, haven’t you any fish?” “no,” they answered.
nor should there be obscenity, foolish talk or coarse joking, which are out of place, but rather thanksgiving.
if it is rainy season for two months, the feet of the people will get a fungus infection if they don't have shoes.
for in the gospel the righteousness of god is revealed—a righteousness that is by faith from first to last, just as it is written: “the righteous will live by faith.”
continually
take my son aside to tell him where others won't hear that i will have him come home for a while when they have finished playing.
we want each of you to show this same diligence to the very end, in order to make your hope sure.
and so the jewish leaders said to the man who had been healed, “it is the sabbath; the law forbids you to carry your mat.”
craving meat because of nursing a baby.
now bethany was less than two miles from jerusalem,
if we sneeze, it's possible that we are getting a cold.
when paul made his appeal to be held over for the emperor's decision, i ordered him held until i could send him to caesar."
and those he predestined, he also called; those he called, he also justified; those he justified, he also glorified.
"if he were not a criminal," they replied, "we would not have handed him over to you."
when they came to the place called the skull, there they crucified him, along with the criminals--one on his right, the other on his left.
once safely on shore, we found out that the island was called malta.
it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power;
deep pool in a creek
they left that place and passed through galilee. jesus did not want anyone to know where they were,
spear shaft
but you are not to be called ‘rabbi,’ for you have one teacher, and you are all brothers.
for it is declared: "you are a priest forever, in the order of melchizedek."
and there was a widow in that town who kept coming to him with the plea, ‘grant me justice against my adversary.’
if this man were not from god, he could do nothing."
the husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife, and likewise the wife to her husband.
to use something as treatment or medicine
if a horse runs, it makes a galloping sound.
as for the person who has many visible veins, his veins can be seen because they protrude.
burnt
paul, a prisoner of christ jesus, and timothy our brother,
he will trade a pig for that one.
you know, brothers and sisters, that our visit to you was not without results.
thick
deer.
boiled corn on the cob.
the ties, those are the reinforcing ties.
a small biting fish
location
if we deliberately keep on sinning after we have received the knowledge of the truth, no sacrifice for sins is left,
one of them, when he saw he was healed, came back, praising god in a loud voice.
and i'll say to myself, "you have plenty of good things laid up for many years. take life easy; eat, drink and be merry."
large earthworm eaten by wild pigs
form of red, malleable clay soil which is suitable for making clay pots.
we know that we have come to know him if we keep his commands.
a hoop is made of rattan that is wound in and out into a circle, which is then rolled with a toss and caught with a thrust of a stick as the children play.
to bend, be bent
to be disappointed.
hair
as for aluminum roofing which is very thin, it easily becomes dented when we step on it as we are using it to make a roof.
as he approached the town gate, a dead person was being carried out—the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. and a large crowd from the town was with her.
famine, hunger season
be slow to carry out an activity or fulfill a request.
then jesus said to her, “woman, you have great faith! your request is granted.” and her daughter was healed at that moment.
and he was amazed at their lack of faith.
they came to appease them and escorted them from the prison, requesting them to leave the city.
today, i won't go to my field because we are being obstructed by the raiders.
so paul stayed in corinth for a year and a half, teaching them the word of god.
“the ten horns you saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but who for one hour will receive authority as kings along with the beast.
become sooty
short baliti tree (bears fruit for birds)
for you know that we dealt with each of you as a father deals with his own children, encouraging, comforting and urging you to live lives worthy of god, who calls you into his kingdom and glory.
when people’s children are sick, they quickly get a chicken for the shaman to perform a wave offering.
the flat places are full of red mites
nose mucus.
with the help of silas, whom i regard as a faithful brother, i have written to you briefly, encouraging you and testifying that this is the true grace of god. stand fast in it.
so i strive always to keep my conscience clear before god and man.
kind of snake said to be poisonous
and everyone who speaks a word against the son of man will be forgiven, but anyone who blasphemes against the holy spirit will not be forgiven.
resh water snail.
thus you nullify the word of god by your tradition that you have handed down. and you do many things like that."
the great city split into three parts, and the cities of the nations collapsed. god remembered babylon the great and gave her the cup filled with the wine of the fury of his wrath.
look! the wages you failed to pay the workmen who mowed your fields are crying out against you. the cries of the harvesters have reached the ears of the lord almighty.
they see if our stewardship of the rice is good.
phrygia and pamphylia, egypt and the parts of libya near cyrene; visitors from rome
let us, therefore, make every effort to enter that rest, so that no one will perish by following their example of disobedience.
i have been claimed by that person; he regards me as his younger brother
and i saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. another book was opened, which is the book of life. the dead were judged according to what they had done as recorded in the books. the sea gave up the dead that were in it, and death and hades gave up the dead that were in them, and each person was judged according to what he had done.
name of a stream and village where a crocodile legend is told.
and envy; drunkenness, orgies, and the like. i warn you, as i did before, that those who live like this will not inherit the kingdom of god.
when we die, our possessions are simply left behind and cannot be taken where we will be after we die.
everyone who heard him was amazed at his understanding and his answers.
when they asked him to spend more time with them, he declined.
"master," said john, "we saw a man driving out demons in your name and we tried to stop him, because he is not one of us."
woven bamboo basket
whatever kind of viand we stew, we salt it and then we take a sample and taste the broth [to see] if the flavor is right.
though they found no proper ground for a death sentence, they asked pilate to have him executed.
they couldn’t share with us
the person who has a had, has a palm
close one’s eyes
if a child sits, he also scoots forward if he cannot yet stand up.
child or older person who is favored, sometimes due to being fairskinned.
slant-eyed; lovely.
all this is evidence that god’s judgment is right, and as a result you will be counted worthy of the kingdom of god, for which you are suffering.
not that we are competent in ourselves to claim anything for ourselves, but our competence comes from god.
“the man runs away because he is a hired hand and cares nothing for the sheep.”
moan
blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
shrew
a person who lacks good manners
"on one of these journeys i was going to damascus with the authority and commission of the chief priests.
a couple with no children, living by themselves on a hilltop
we were surprised at amutatoy.
what i tell you in the dark, speak in the daylight; what is whispered in your ear, proclaim from the roofs.
joaquin is still the one who has the authority of being the captain of barangay gupitan.
there is no need for me to write to you about this service to the saints.
in his right hand he held seven stars, and out of his mouth came a sharp double-edged sword. his face was like the sun shining in all its brilliance.
nest
‘an enemy did this,’ he replied. the servants asked him, ‘do you want us to go and pull them up?’
children born not of natural descent, nor of human decision or a husband’s will, but born of god.
to take a bit of salt, it is called one pinch.
perhaps i will stay with you for a while, or even spend the winter, so that you can help me on my journey, wherever i go.
cook meat with camotes
we are not withholding our affection from you, but you are withholding yours from us.
all have turned away, they have together become worthless; there is no one who does good, not even one.”
rip
so then he told them plainly, “lazarus is dead.”
for in the days before the flood, people were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, up to the day noah entered the ark;
three days later he called together the leaders of the jews. when they had assembled, paul said to them: "my brothers, although i have done nothing against our people or against the customs of our ancestors, i was arrested in jerusalem and handed over to the romans.
turmeric plant used to cook with meat
euphemism for private parts
kind of cicada
return
camote or corn which has been chewed on by a rat
block
very slowly
but they were kept from recognizing him.
have a fear of people
a group of people working together
for as woman came from man, so also man is born of woman. but everything comes from god.
whom he poured out on us generously through jesus christ our savior,
“they are not of the world, even as i am not of it.”
now, just now
then paul made his defense: “i have done nothing wrong against the jewish law or against the temple or against caesar.”
emulate me in my thinking and behaviour
yet a time is coming and has now come when the true worshipers will worship the father in the spirit and in truth, for they are the kind of worshipers the father seeks.
there is another who testifies in my favor, and i know that his testimony about me is true.
ogmad carried that table on her head.
in the future.
now there were seven brothers. the first one married a woman and died childless.
by faith abraham, when called to go to a place he would later receive as his inheritance, obeyed and went, even though he did not know where he was going.
a deep hurt, ache, or throb as that of a broken arm.
they show that the requirements of the law are written on their hearts, their consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts sometimes accusing them and at other times even defending them.)
they enter the traps now because it’s the season for making kaingin.
when the liboganon river flooded, the corn which was newly harvested was carried downriver by the current.
for this was how the promise was stated: “at the appointed time i will return, and sarah will have a son.”
for from him and through him and to him are all things. to him be the glory forever! amen.
to disembark, to land
and to offer a sacrifice in keeping with what is said in the law of the lord: “a pair of doves or two young pigeons.”
if you are praising god with your spirit, how can one who finds himself among those who do not understand say "amen" to your thanksgiving, since he does not know what you are saying?
the revelation from jesus christ, which god gave him to show his servants what must soon take place. he made it known by sending his angel to his servant john,
rocks are what have been intentionally scattered over the path.
to dispose of
what shall we say, then? is the law sinful? certainly not! nevertheless, i would not have known what sin was had it not been for the law. for i would not have known what coveting really was if the law had not said, “you shall not covet.”
enter through the narrow gate. for wide is the gate and broad is the road that leads to destruction, and many enter through it.
a container made of bark or bamboo used for carrying unshelled rice.
name of a village on the libogonan river between togop and magguiimon.
small, round bean
the number of the mounted troops was two hundred million. i heard their number.
game.
if he is scolded, he won't let it bother him.
“what is written in the law?” he replied. “how do you read it?”
when we take another step we step down.
noise when walking on bamboo floor
be finicky about something
glow
we are just resident aliens here on earth.
being strengthened with all power according to his glorious might so that you may have great endurance and patience, and joyfully
the children are chewing|and sucking on on the sugarcane.
to be wrinkled or puckered
you hypocrite, first take the plank out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.
kind of bird similar to a robin but walks on the ground
crooked
this is big
shake water from body
how can you say to your brother, ‘let me take the speck out of your eye,’ when all the time there is a plank in your own eye?
to become entangled in, as in one's problems or difficulties.
who will mock him and spit on him, flog him and kill him. three days later he will rise."
be strong to pull [on the saw] so that you will learn so that you will know how to saw.
to pray or sacrifice
to shed leaves, as trees
for something to be broken loose from something else such as blood clots
the merchants who sold these things and gained their wealth from her will stand far off, terrified at her torment. they will weep and mourn
for the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil. some people, eager for money, have wandered from the faith and pierced themselves with many griefs.
let’s all of us pound
still other seed fell on good soil, where it produced a crop—a hundred, sixty or thirty times what was sown.
feel with tongue or fingers.
if anyone does not obey our instruction in this letter, take special note of him. do not associate with him, in order that he may feel ashamed.
to keep close to
a person nervously moves his foot but he is not itching; he is just moving it for no particular reason.
“again, you have heard that it was said to the people long ago, ‘do not break your oath, but fulfill to the lord the vows you have made.’
your brother has come,' he replied, 'and your father has killed the fattened calf because he has him back safe and sound.'
he had james, the brother of john, put to death with the sword.
that [word] race each other is a game. they get in sacks and run. the one who is able to finish [first] is the one who wins.
your father abraham rejoiced at the thought of seeing my day; he saw it and was glad."
“as the father has loved me, so have i loved you. now remain in my love.”
if the tips of a carabao’s horns are white, people will not make a pet of it because they suppose that it will horn people.
jessica just wanted to claim a large cluster of lansones for herself.
they laughed at him, knowing that she was dead.
catch,
camotes that won’t root but just creep all over.
for while we are in this tent, we groan and are burdened, because we do not wish to be unclothed but to be clothed with our heavenly dwelling, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
ruin and misery mark their ways,
when he had gone indoors, the blind men came to him, and he asked them, “do you believe that i am able to do this?” “yes, lord,” they replied.
during the days of jesus’ life on earth, he offered up prayers and petitions with fervent cries and tears to the one who could save him from death, and he was heard because of his reverent submission.
i refuse to have anything to do with you.
his fever decreased.
if that is how god clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, will he not much more clothe you—you of little faith?
to strengthen (as one's faith)
you did not put oil on my head, but she has poured perfume on my feet.
enter a house when the occupants are eating
be out of breath as when one is congested
subside
but go and learn what this means: ‘i desire mercy, not sacrifice.’ for i have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”
suffer a change of circumstances
slash
some jews who went around driving out evil spirits tried to invoke the name of the lord jesus over those who were demon-possessed. they would say, “in the name of the jesus whom paul preaches, i command you to come out.”
before the coming of jesus, john preached repentance and baptism to all the people of israel.
want sympathy
all the people were astonished and said, “could this be the son of david?”
and if a revelation comes to someone who is sitting down, the first speaker should stop.
he writes the same way in all his letters, speaking in them of these matters. his letters contain some things that are hard to understand, which ignorant and unstable people distort, as they do the other scriptures, to their own destruction.
as for people long ago, they weren't able to play because they would be quick to demand retribution and then would ask for a large settlement.
paul then stood up in the meeting of the areopagus and said: "men of athens! i see that in every way you are very religious.
to be in doubt about something
you also say, ‘if anyone swears by the altar, it means nothing; but anyone who swears by the gift on the altar is bound by that oath.’
when the moon comes up, our bodies are hit by the light of the moon, we have a shadow.
but these days, cassava is now being used to make agkud.
you were bought at a price. therefore honor god with your body.
"but what about you?" he asked. "who do you say i am?" peter answered, "you are the christ. "
truly i tell you, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the son of man coming in his kingdom.”
small male rat.
a junction or crossing, as of a highway or two rivers.
so what shall i do? i will pray with my spirit, but i will also pray with my mind; i will sing with my spirit, but i will also sing with my mind.
side beam
what i mean, brothers and sisters, is that the time is short. from now on those who have wives should live as if they do not;
no one will scold you because i have made the decision.
then he told me, "do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, because the time is near.
he spread out the scattered stones as he arranged them because he raked them.
wheat.
to whine for food
and not to steal from them, but to show that they can be fully trusted, so that in every way they will make the teaching about god our savior attractive.
to watch, view.
to divide into equal portions.
to be lulled.
but whatever was to my profit i now consider loss for the sake of christ.
whoever believes and is baptized will be saved, but whoever does not believe will be condemned.
when we cut [something] into lengths, we just repeatedly cut them short.
he came as a witness to testify concerning that light, so that through him all might believe.
our
rather, clothe yourselves with the lord jesus christ, and do not think about how to gratify the desires of the sinful nature.
‘because no one has hired us,’ they answered. he said to them, ‘you also go and work in my vineyard.’
wear sandals but not an extra tunic.
when he heard that it was jesus of nazareth, he began to shout, "jesus, son of david, have mercy on me!"
plead
beat or whip repeatedly
we’ll go by ourselves.
for many to throw something at one another.
and so, somehow, to attain to the resurrection from the dead.
we encourage the one singing love songs [by saying], “continue singing love songs.”
she isn’t a nice-looking woman
he replied, "whether he is a sinner or not, i don't know. one thing i do know. i was blind but now i see!"
if the person's omen is bad, he will not proceed because he is being held back.
gurgling noise of water being poured out of a bamboo water pole
it’s only our meeting; don’t you women come along.
year
at once they left their nets and followed him.
some of them were looking for a reason to accuse jesus, so they watched him closely to see if he would heal him on the sabbath.
as she was pouring the water on the flowers, a lapinid wasp nest got wet and so she was stung.
to be brought back to life
intentionally scatter something
remedy.
i am not commanding you, but i want to test the sincerity of your love by comparing it with the earnestness of others.
jesus miraculously healed many people.
“go, stand in the temple courts,” he said, “and tell the people all about this new life.”
large white bracelets made of hard shell.
blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth.
blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy.
to pant
sleep on the ground; pay attention
the children will measure each other's stone's throw [to see] who can reach the other side [of the river with his stone].
but when that servant went out, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred silver coins. he grabbed him and began to choke him. ‘pay back what you owe me!’ he demanded.
jesus called out with a loud voice, "father, into your hands i commit my spirit." when he had said this, he breathed his last
jesus said, “let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.”
therefore, since through god's mercy we have this ministry, we do not lose heart.
something, as speech, that hits its mark, or is to the point.
did i exploit you through any of the men i sent to you?
small bamboo lime container.
truly i tell you, all this will come on this generation.
show respect for someone who has died by being present at a wake.
the rain came down, the streams rose, and the winds blew and beat against that house; yet it did not fall, because it had its foundation on the rock.
it will be a cause of much embarrassment to us.
after he said this, he was taken up before their very eyes, and a cloud hid him from their sight.
he’s blowing his nose.
to something used to make smoke
to sit up
you be the one to choose it.
beautiful
it contained all kinds of four-footed animals, as well as reptiles and birds.
and we will be ready to punish every act of disobedience, once your obedience is complete.
the person who dances to the drum waves two pieces of material.
these have come so that your faith--of greater worth than gold, which perishes even though refined by fire--may be proved genuine and may result in praise, glory and honor when jesus christ is revealed.
finally i checked out the fish trap and it was was filled with small fish which were caught in the fish trap.
a black bead
when the ubun-ubun dove calls it says, “bagu-bù, huun, huun, huun.”
if you fail to show up on [that day] of your return, i will expect that what you say is not valid.
when he heard that it was jesus of nazareth, he began to shout, "jesus, son of david, have mercy on me!"
when the water has cooled off, we will drink it.
the reason i left you in crete was that you might put in order what was left unfinished and appoint elders in every town, as i directed you.
all things have been committed to me by my father. no one knows the son except the father, and no one knows the father except the son and those to whom the son chooses to reveal him.
because he loves our nation and has built our synagogue.”
nest
a kind of wood
“sovereign lord, as you have promised, you may now dismiss your servant in peace.
they shouted back, "no, not him! give us barabbas!" now barabbas had taken part in a rebellion.
for we know in part and we prophesy in part,
he is a good person because he makes sure that the money reaches the owner of the corn.
peter stayed in joppa for some time with a tanner named simon.
sit with legs spread out
when we put bits into the mouths of horses to make them obey us, we can turn the whole animal.
you be the one to choose it.
and, “a stone that causes people to stumble and a rock that makes them fall.” they stumble because they disobey the message—which is also what they were destined for.
one night the lord spoke to paul in a vision: “do not be afraid; keep on speaking, do not be silent.
i answered, "sir, you know."
after arresting him, he put him in prison, handing him over to be guarded by four squads of four soldiers each. herod intended to bring him out for public trial after the passover.
doe (female deer)
and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge in the image of its creator.
no one else dared join them, even though they were highly regarded by the people.
become darkened
feast given for work; headache; chills from malaria
watch out that you do not lose what you have worked for, but that you may be rewarded fully.
there was a child who burned down their house.
some fell on rocky ground, and when it came up, the plants withered because they had no moisture.
we have to be hunkered down because we are afraid that we might be seen.
but peter and john replied, “which is right in god’s eyes: to listen to you, or to him? you be the judges!
to figure in someone's dream which foretells some bad circumstance
we know that the law is spiritual; but i am unspiritual, sold as a slave to sin.
to blow off (by wind)
when they arrived at salamis, they proclaimed the word of god in the jewish synagogues. john was with them as their helper.
house post.
to split or open up as a log
mock
our house was protected from the wate
i write to you, fathers, because you have known him who is from the beginning. i write to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of god lives in you, and you have overcome the evil one.
to cut into strips
“i no longer call you servants, because a servant does not know his master’s business. instead, i have called you friends, for everything that i learned from my father i have made known to you.”
when we aim [a gun] at a bird, and when iwe have sighted  it [we] shoot the gun the and then [the bird] is hit.
and you have forgotten that word of encouragement that addresses you as sons: "my son, do not make light of the lord's discipline, and do not lose heart when he rebukes you,
but the [motorboat] motor which i had brought was slow because it only had five horsepower.
type of tree with cotton-like pods
poke, as to get someone’s attention
catch
with great power the apostles continued to testify to the resurrection of the lord jesus. and god’s grace was so powerfully at work in them all
to help
i smoked it (meat) so that it wouldn’t get wormy.
by this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another."
and after taking some food, he regained his strength. saul spent several days with the disciples in damascus.
they did what your power and will had decided beforehand should happen.
for the law was given through moses; grace and truth came through jesus christ.
when it has become afternoon, we place the chicken basket on the ground and then the mother will go inside and and [her chicks] will be collected.
as for that anit taboo, they say it is god's punishment for messing around with creatures because, as for the creatures, they don’t bother people.
when he learned from the centurion that it was so, he gave the body to joseph.
greet one another with a kiss of love. peace to all of you who are in christ.
messy hair
a bus has a side, a multicab and a “jeep”
miss, be lonesome for
wicked (used as a derogatory term for a child)
because you will not abandon me to the realm of the dead, you will not let your holy one see decay.
to expel gas.
he told her, “go, call your husband and come back.”
impette’s gnawing on a bone.
now it is required that those who have been given a trust must prove faithful.
look, he is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, even those who pierced him; and all the peoples of the earth will mourn because of him. so shall it be! amen.
“how can i,” he said, “unless someone explains it to me?” so he invited philip to come up and sit with him.
would
if there is a person who [wants to] borrow get something on credit but is ashamed to speak up, then he will tell another person. that person will say, “he has something to discuss with you.”
to have gone, or to have left for home
so we all agreed to choose some men and send them to you with our dear friends barnabas and paul—
i thank god, whom i serve, as my ancestors did, with a clear conscience, as night and day i constantly remember you in my prayers.
head louse
every island fled away and the mountains could not be found.
enclose, make an enclosure
thus, by their fruit you will recognize them.
but not all the israelites accepted the good news. for isaiah says, “lord, who has believed our message?”
the crowd listened to paul until he said this. then they raised their voices and shouted, "rid the earth of him! he's not fit to live!"
cleaned area of ground, yard
(yes, i also baptized the household of stephanas; beyond that, i don't remember if i baptized anyone else.)
behind the ear
slash up into pieces
who has saved us and called us to a holy life--not because of anything we have done but because of his own purpose and grace. this grace was given us in christ jesus before the beginning of time,
blessed and holy are those who have part in the first resurrection. the second death has no power over them, but they will be priests of god and of christ and will reign with him for a thousand years.
receive money for work
for they heard them speaking in tongues and praising god.
if there are older people carrying on a conversation, there are younger people who are paying close attention as they listen.
return the same night
as for cats, when they are in heat or their time of mating arrives, they are always meowing when it is night time.
a kind of tree
international war
glutton
hit the mark.
to seize something
in fact, no one can enter a strong man's house and carry off his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man. then he can rob his house.
wet to some degree; damp
whoever believes in me, as the scripture has said, streams of living water will flow from within him."
other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the plants.
curved weeding tool similar to a sythe
remedy.
taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke them. then he gave them to the disciples to distribute to the people.
“you are the salt of the earth. but if the salt loses its saltiness, how can it be made salty again? it is no longer good for anything, except to be thrown out and trampled underfoot.
a warrior's knife used to kill people
next month, i will borrow your land.
for in christ all the fullness of the deity lives in bodily form,
male, man, boy
now herod the tetrarch heard about all that was going on. and he was perplexed because some were saying that john had been raised from the dead,
during the high-priesthood of annas and caiaphas, the word of god came to john son of zechariah in the wilderness.
bump one’s elbow
yet they could not find any way to do it, because all the people hung on his words.
who is weak, and i do not feel weak? who is led into sin, and i do not inwardly burn?
seem like
no matter what i said, [she] wouldn't agree to stay with her other daughter.
make lime
the jews insisted, "we have a law, and according to that law he must die, because he claimed to be the son of god."
if a person who is jealous cannot steal, he will hate us and his view of us will be bad.
as the weeds are pulled up and burned in the fire, so it will be at the end of the age.
because he was teaching his disciples. he said to them, "the son of man is going to be betrayed into the hands of men. they will kill him, and after three days he will rise."
but god raised him from the dead,
and he gave a loud shout like the roar of a lion. when he shouted, the voices of the seven thunders spoke.
recognize
at that hour of the night the jailer took them and washed their wounds; then immediately he and all his family were baptized.
shaking
so then, men ought to regard us as servants of christ and as those entrusted with the secret things of god.
the wings are beginning to sprout feathers.
for the kingdom of god is not a matter of talk but of power.
cry at being left behind
don’t we have the right to food and drink?
to roam around buying horses
menstruate
while he was still speaking a crowd came up, and the man who was called judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. he approached jesus to kiss him,
by faith abraham, when god tested him, offered isaac as a sacrifice. he who had received the promises was about to sacrifice his one and only son, even though god had said to him, "it is through isaac that your offspring will be reckoned."
wooden ear-plug
jesus answered her, “if you knew the gift of god and who it is that asks you for a drink, you would have asked him and he would have given you living water.”
candy.
he is always turning over because his pain is excessive.
muslim haircut
armband, used as a charm.
follow the way of love and eagerly desire gifts of the spirit, especially prophecy.
to continue on with something as though it had not been interrupted
it has wide leaves which extend in a straight line from the body of that kapigsula tree.
when we are in a good relationship with our companions, if there is a small problem, it will be quickly resolved.
part
tobacco seed
buntit has a lot of clothing.
they were very sad and began to say to him one after the other, “surely you don’t mean me, lord?”
beautiful; to have a good attitude toward someone.
whatever
approach a house when the occupants are sleeping
so in christ jesus you are all children of god through faith,
many testified falsely against him, but their statements did not agree
headband
as jesus was saying these things, a woman in the crowd called out, "blessed is the mother who gave you birth and nursed you."
turn up
lean away
when we had sailed across the open sea off the coast of cilicia and pamphylia, we landed at myra in lycia.
i want you to know that our brother timothy has been released. if he arrives soon, i will come with him to see you.
wild pig's calling its young because of fear of danger
jesus was driving out a demon that was mute. when the demon left, the man who had been mute spoke, and the crowd was amazed.
but suppose the servant says to himself, 'my master is taking a long time in coming,' and he then begins to beat the menservants and maidservants and to eat and drink and get drunk.
two
jesus said to the woman, “your faith has saved you; go in peace.”
lift up both hands
if a person walks and stomps, his steps are loud and we are awakened.
the second angel poured out his bowl on the sea, and it turned into blood like that of a dead person, and every living thing in the sea died.
when the uproar had ended, paul sent for the disciples and, after encouraging them, said goodbye and set out for macedonia.
rattan
they said, "moses permitted a man to write a certificate of divorce and send her away."
for the third time he spoke to them: "why? what crime has this man committed? i have found in him no grounds for the death penalty. therefore i will have him punished and then release him."
breath
so whatever you believe about these things keep between yourself and god. blessed is the man who does not condemn himself by what he approves.
if there is food there, there are people to be fed by you.
to break (glass, water pole, cooking pot)
"we are going up to jerusalem," he said, "and the son of man will be betrayed to the chief priests and teachers of the law. they will condemn him to death and will hand him over to the gentiles,
howl
eavesdrop
to move about in all directions
and was designated by god to be high priest in the order of melchizedek.
“very truly i tell you, whoever hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life and will not be judged but has crossed over from death to life.
he fled naked, leaving his garment behind.
at this, they picked up stones to stone him, but jesus hid himself, slipping away from the temple grounds.
scrotum
wedding feast
take care that what the prophets have said does not happen to you:
if you won't take care [of the children], search for something to eat!
fight
break or cut off stems as one harvests grain
craving
a black bird
me
dry
cooked, to cook, a cook
and having disarmed the powers and authorities, he made a public spectacle of them, triumphing over them by the cross.
there was a person whose clothing was torn and so he patched it by sewing on [a piece of] material.
the elders who direct the affairs of the church well are worthy of double honor, especially those whose work is preaching and teaching.
topic of conversation
wild
something stored up as valuable to that person; a treasure or a keepsake.
throw a temper tantrum
grown up
candy is sweet because it has sugar
to another faith by the same spirit, to another gifts of healing by that one spirit,
we have confidence in the lord that you are doing and will continue to do the things we command.
give someone the willies
therefore i tell you that the kingdom of god will be taken away from you and given to a people who will produce its fruit.
i’ll move in with the americans [and] work for them.
to transfer
for he has been mindful of the humble state of his servant. from now on all generations will call me blessed,
cut bamboo and remove the knot.
this is the genealogy of jesus the messiah the son of david, the son of abraham:
for i tell you that many prophets and kings wanted to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.”
that propagate, it will become many and spread there in our place.
“now get up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do.”
traumatized or immobilized,
as for a person who stutters, his speaking is not straight.
no, not, don’t (non-past negative)
stringy
to boil a liquid
when it was decided that we would sail for italy, paul and some other prisoners were handed over to a centurion named julius, who belonged to the imperial regiment.
seeing a fig tree by the road, he went up to it but found nothing on it except leaves. then he said to it, “may you never bear fruit again!” immediately the tree withered.
“he saved others,” they said, “but he can’t save himself! he’s the king of israel! let him come down
prison
cut off the ears of animal.
nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. there will be famines and earthquakes in various places.
call one’s dog
if a child gets sick who is always bathing [in the river], the older people say that he afflicted by an evil spirit because he was affected by a long-haired spirit [which lives in the water].
lean past zenith
he is the one who comes after me, the straps of whose sandals i am not worthy to untie.”
as you come to him, the living stone—rejected by humans but chosen by god and precious to him—
then a voice told him, “get up, peter. kill and eat.”
give to everyone who asks you, and if anyone takes what belongs to you, do not demand it back.
the wild pigs escape.
no one who denies the son has the father; whoever acknowledges the son has the father also.
a person who makes a recipe from the tubod plant, grates coconut with which he makes coconut milk.
praise be to the god and father of our lord jesus christ, the father of compassion and the god of all comfort,
thing or something
raft
and everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or fields for my sake will receive a hundred times as much and will inherit eternal life.
to break up, turn over, as the soil in a field
to him be the power for ever and ever. amen.
each man should give what he has decided in his heart to give, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for god loves a cheerful giver.
to go the shortest route; short cut
call one’s dog
when it goes inside, the head of the snake enters the hole first.
to be silent.
and that in this matter no one should wrong or take advantage of a brother or sister. the lord will punish all those who commit such sins, as we told you and warned you before.
we (topic, dual personal)
the only one who will be designated to claim the head will be the one who carried the pig on his back.
lose one’s baby teeth
to open one's eyes
since we live by the spirit, let us keep in step with the spirit.
fruit of a vine used to poison fish
he answered, “i was sent only to the lost sheep of israel.”
that
very hard (as wood)
to those who sold doves he said, “get these out of here! stop turning my father’s house into a market!”
“all these i have kept,” the young man said. “what do i still lack?”
you cannot drink the cup of the lord and the cup of demons too; you cannot have a part in both the lord's table and the table of demons.
when pilate heard this, he brought jesus out and sat down on the judge’s seat at a place known as the stone pavement (which in aramaic is gabbatha).
for the wages of sin is death, but the gift of god is eternal life in christ jesus our lord.
“all i have is yours, and all you have is mine. and glory has come to me through them.”
tiny lizard
there are [some kinds of] tree(s) which fall over and then don't sprout.
they replied, “some say john the baptist; others say elijah; and still others, that one of the prophets of long ago has come back to life.”
the seed falling on rocky ground refers to someone who hears the word and at once receives it with joy.
the python is sneaking up on the chicken.
a kind of bird size of dove
glottalized singing or crying
she assumes that she will accompany you to nasuli.
not sticky, well-cooked rice
marmot's mound
if the carabao cannot touch bottom, it will be carried away by the current. but if the carabao can touch bottom, it will manage the current as it crosses the river.
"no one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment. if he does, the new piece will pull away from the old, making the tear worse.
the one who comes from above is above all; the one who is from the earth belongs to the earth, and speaks as one from the earth. the one who comes from heaven is above all.
stunted rice
but small is the gate and narrow the road that leads to life, and only a few find it.
anyone who welcomes him shares in his wicked work.
launder
whatever kind of viand we stew, we salt it and then we take a sample and taste the broth [to see] if the flavor is right.
every two days
the chief priests picked up the coins and said, “it is against the law to put this into the treasury, since it is blood money.”
shout at the rain
the servant fell on his knees before him. ‘be patient with me,’ he begged, ‘and i will pay back everything.’
oversee.
temporary
jesus replied, “go back and report to john what you hear and see:  the blind receive sight, the lame walk, those who have leprosy are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the good news is proclaimed to the poor.  blessed is anyone who does not stumble on account of me.”
cheesy substance on newborn’s skin
cooked, to cook, a cook
jesus replied, “do what you came for, friend.” then the men stepped forward, seized jesus and arrested him.
a kind of black, short, small-grained rice.
that which is called a valley in english is a flat area which is between two mountains.
any fruit or vegetable blossom.
pasita fed tumbasoy because she wasn’t embarrassed.
as it is, you boast and brag. all such boasting is evil.
scrape out, as papaya seeds
offer
pull or yank
(now jesus himself had pointed out that a prophet has no honor in his own country.)
when there are many [grubs] which are making whispery  and gurgling, rumbling [sounds], then we split knotched pula palm log and we see many grubs which are squirming.
to place between
the holes of the marmot’s mound is connected underneath to the places where they make their nests
bend in river or road.
when a gentle south wind began to blow, they thought they had obtained what they wanted; so they weighed anchor and sailed along the shore of crete.
to hear
political power
after having anticipated for how many months as they were waiting to harvest, then they were not able to harvest [after all].
if our cooking of viand is good, it is delicious because it is tasty because the meat/fish is tasty.
to teach to a person or animal how to do something.
“i am the good shepherd; i know my sheep and my sheep know me—”
conjunctivitis (red, pus-filled eye condition)
and especially so because you are well acquainted with all the jewish customs and controversies. therefore, i beg you to listen to me patiently.
but now in christ jesus you who once were far away have been brought near by the blood of christ.
if we are not entangled by sufferings..
and i saw a beast coming out of the sea. he had ten horns and seven heads, with ten crowns on his horns, and on each head a blasphemous name. the beast i saw resembled a leopard, but had feet like those of a bear and a mouth like that of a lion. the dragon gave the beast his power and his throne and great authority.
the seventh angel sounded his trumpet, and there were loud voices in heaven, which said: “the kingdom of the world has become the kingdom of our lord and of his messiah, and he will reign for ever and ever.”
the following day he arrived in caesarea. cornelius was expecting them and had called together his relatives and close friends.
but each in his own turn: christ, the firstfruits; then, when he comes, those who belong to him.
it is thundering loudly.
and so we know and rely on the love god has for us. god is love. whoever lives in love lives in god, and god in him.
when she recognized peter’s voice, she was so overjoyed she ran back without opening it and exclaimed, “peter is at the door!”
if he doesn't treat his companion well he will act badly toward him because he will do wrong things to him.
to crow
barbs
then they asked him, “where is your father?”
great great grandparent
then, when i arrive, i will give letters of introduction to the men you approve and send them with your gift to jerusalem.
“as long as it is day, we must do the works of him who sent me. night is coming, when no one can work.”
jesus said, "father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing." and they divided up his clothes by casting lots.
so peter was kept in prison, but the church was earnestly praying to god for him.
fish
happy
the son of joshua, the son of eliezer, the son of jorim, the son of matthat, the son of levi,
this man lived in the tombs, and no one could bind him any more, not even with a chain. for he had often been chained hand and foot, but he tore the chains apart and broke the irons on his feet. no one was strong enough to subdue him.
these are those who did not defile themselves with women, for they remained virgins. they follow the lamb wherever he goes. they were purchased from among mankind and offered as firstfruits to god and the lamb.
but peter and john replied, “which is right in god’s eyes: to listen to you, or to him? you be the judges!
to fit
joaquin cannot manage to resolve this problem because it is very difficult.
spider
when they came to the home of the synagogue ruler, jesus saw a commotion, with people crying and wailing loudly.
every valley shall be filled in, every mountain and hill made low. the crooked roads shall become straight, the rough ways smooth.
rap on the kobbiung.
as paul and barnabas were leaving the synagogue, the people invited them to speak further about these things on the next sabbath.
the pharisees and sadducees came to jesus and tested him by asking him to show them a sign from heaven.
one strand
one couple
so do what we tell you. there are four men with us who have made a vow.
then they gathered around him and asked him, “lord, are you at this time going to restore the kingdom to israel?”
those who want to make a good impression outwardly are trying to compel you to be circumcised. the only reason they do this is to avoid being persecuted for the cross of christ.
frustrated
they romp with their owners.
there was a person who placed a noose beside the nest of a dove. then he shooed the dove and then the neck of the dove was caught in the noose because the noose tightened around its neck.
papaya
the sight was so terrifying that moses said, "i am trembling with fear."
as for the house of a person which was leaning due to a strong wind, it was braced by its owner so that his house would not fall over.
look down
he will show you a large upper room, all furnished. make preparations there."
you will be hated by everyone because of me, but the one who stands firm to the end will be saved.
the water of a side channel flows through and joins  the body [of the river].  it is called the junction of the rivers.
circumcision has value if you observe the law, but if you break the law, you have become as though you had not been circumcised.
lift up, as a light or one's hands
run swiftly, gallop
to be effective.
tip over
jesus replied, “very truly i tell you, no one can see the kingdom of god unless they are born again.”
to be too full, to have overeaten so as to be uncomfortable
early.
thigh
the woman was dressed in purple and scarlet, and was glittering with gold, precious stones and pearls. she held a golden cup in her hand, filled with abominable things and the filth of her adulteries.
the commander dismissed the young man and cautioned him, "don't tell anyone that you have reported this to me."
fetish used to prevent rain and to kill enemies
peter said to her, “how could you conspire to test the spirit of the lord? listen! the feet of the men who buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out also.”
that is why i was angry with that generation; i said, ‘their hearts are always going astray, and they have not known my ways.’
is not the cup of thanksgiving for which we give thanks a participation in the blood of christ? and is not the bread that we break a participation in the body of christ?
later, knowing that all was now completed, and so that the scripture would be fulfilled, jesus said, "i am thirsty."
cut rattan
and to whom did god swear that they would never enter his rest if not to those who disobeyed?
refuse
day after day, in the temple courts and from house to house, they never stopped teaching and proclaiming the good news that jesus is the messiah.
hunt with a dog
zither
so do not worry, saying, ‘what shall we eat?’ or ‘what shall we drink?’ or ‘what shall we wear?’
to massage the body.
hospitable
break
for one's legs and thighs to be spread apart when sitting or walking
in the first place, i hear that when you come together as a church, there are divisions among you, and to some extent i believe it.
kind of decorated spear
if the spear projects , there’s a raider around.
i myself did not know him, but the reason i came baptizing with water was that he might be revealed to israel.”
following
we have heard that some went out from us without our authorization and disturbed you, troubling your minds by what they said.
but to those whom god has called, both jews and greeks, christ the power of god and the wisdom of god.
and throw that worthless servant outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
made us alive with christ even when we were dead in transgressions—it is by grace you have been saved.
but because of his great love for us, god, who is rich in mercy,
and longing to eat what fell from the rich man’s table. even the dogs came and licked his sores.
for the lamb at the center of the throne will be their shepherd; he will lead them to springs of living water. and god will wipe away every tear from their eyes."
therefore encourage one another and build each other up, just as in fact you are doing.
the people long ago would cut a piece of bamboo which was about the size of a pole which was used to measure a diagram of a house in order to establish where the rooms, the porch and the doors will be.
work
leak through.
for in just a very little while, "he who is coming will come and will not delay.
to slide and fall down at a distance.
to puff up or regain shape (as a cushion)
chew
one's gallbladder is good if there is nothing to upset [him/her].
if a horse doesn't want to travel, it continually rears up as it tries to shake off the reins as it walks.
it was preparation day (that is, the day before the sabbath). so as evening approached, joseph of arimathea, a prominent member of the council, who was himself waiting for the kingdom of god, went boldly to pilate and asked for jesus' body.
upper back
twitch, as in the eye or cheek
rumbling sound
to take something or someone back
then simon peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the high priest’s servant, cutting off his right ear. (the servant’s name was malchus.)
there was someone who obtained a lot of small fish which she caught in her fish trap.
anyway
"and if anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him to be thrown into the sea with a large millstone tied around his neck.
tobacco
it is difficult if we are the recipients of someone's angry outburst.
the one who is not circumcised physically and yet obeys the law will condemn you who, even though you have the written code and circumcision, are a lawbreaker.
the number of the men who had eaten was five thousand.
?
by advocating customs unlawful for us romans to accept or practice."
for goodness sake!
but god found fault with the people and said : "the time is coming, declares the lord, when i will make a new covenant with the house of israel and with the house of judah.
he replied, "whether he is a sinner or not, i don't know. one thing i do know. i was blind but now i see!"
soot from a hearth
argue
distinct, exaggerated speech, slow
i will beg some of your palm tree fiber because i will make it into kindling so that we will have a fire.
embrace
i ask you, therefore, not to be discouraged because of my sufferings for you, which are your glory.
we know that anyone born of god does not continue to sin; the one who was born of god keeps him safe, and the evil one cannot harm him.
simon peter and another disciple were following jesus. because this disciple was known to the high priest, he went with jesus into the high priest’s courtyard,
rooted and built up in him, strengthened in the faith as you were taught, and overflowing with thankfulness.
"do you see all these great buildings?" replied jesus. "not one stone here will be left on another; every one will be thrown down."
strain
but now apart from the law the righteousness of god has been made known, to which the law and the prophets testify.
regret.
if he scoots, it is just one short motion.
other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the plants, so that they did not bear grain.
talkative
to be jealous.
to kneel.
the dove called
the rice will shrivel, dry up.
inflate
the male [rodent] was lacking [food] to eat because the female was greedy.
cheer in praise, as at a game or cockfight
vein
when elizabeth heard mary’s greeting, the baby leaped in her womb, and elizabeth was filled with the holy spirit.
it was preparation day (that is, the day before the sabbath). so as evening approached, joseph of arimathea, a prominent member of the council, who was himself waiting for the kingdom of god, went boldly to pilate and asked for jesus' body.
i urge you, therefore, to reaffirm your love for him.
i saw none of the other apostles—only james, the lord’s brother.
solitary thing (like a lone word in a language)
so jesus said, "when you have lifted up the son of man, then you will know that i am the one i claim to be and that i do nothing on my own but speak just what the father has taught me.
there is something that breaks out [on the body] which itches.
kapok is burned on my arm.
bite
move over because i am getting squashed.
to have children one right after the other
what i mean, brothers and sisters, is that the time is short. from now on those who have wives should live as if they do not;
neither height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of god that is in christ jesus our lord.
blow
to be curved, as a road
slap or knock
floating ribs
i needed clothes and you clothed me, i was sick and you looked after me, i was in prison and you came to visit me.’
to transmit disease
beg camotes from apusow.
noise
for when there is a change of the priesthood, there must also be a change of the law.
at this, they picked up stones to stone him, but jesus hid himself, slipping away from the temple grounds.
the jews who heard these words were again divided.
cross one’s thighs.
the only thing they pay attention to is their doing bad
accept him whose faith is weak, without passing judgment on disputable matters.
the male-teacher and female teacher(s), they are the teachers of the students.
truly i tell you, among those born of women there has not risen anyone greater than john the baptist; yet whoever is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
suddenly
the number of those who ate was four thousand men, besides women and children.
musical sound of kuglung.
he said to them, "why are you troubled, and why do doubts rise in your minds?
[i've] had it with this child who is always crying who has a hollowed-out mouth!
you were slow to make your purchase of the axe because you needed its price to be reduced.
without love, unforgiving, slanderous, without self-control, brutal, not lovers of the good,
he was teaching in their synagogues, and everyone praised him.
we went on ahead to the ship and sailed for assos, where we were going to take paul aboard. he had made this arrangement because he was going there on foot.
to be drawn together (people to a celebration or event)
not until halfway through the feast did jesus go up to the temple courts and begin to teach.
jesus replied, “what is impossible with man is possible with god.”
to plan
david calls him 'lord.' how then can he be his son?"
cut off straight across
whoever has will be given more; whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him."
tin can used for cooking
to finish
it is like a mustard seed, which a man took and planted in his garden. it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the air perched in its branches."
granted. but they were broken off because of unbelief, and you stand by faith. do not be arrogant, but be afraid.
become contaminated or dirty by helping at birth or illness.
the woman who is outgoing is good because she isn't shy; she quickly shows hospitality when there are guests.
a kind of white rice.
have one crossed eye.
jesus replied, "i tell you the truth, everyone who sins is a slave to sin.
since we have now been justified by his blood, how much more shall we be saved from god’s wrath through him!
thirst
watch over
then i will tell them plainly, ‘i never knew you. away from me, you evildoers!’
when the pig has been cooked, they strip the bones which still have flesh on them.
the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you all.
we were drawn away to something else so that we were not able to accomplish
so that your giving may be in secret. then your father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.
they replied, "are you from galilee, too? look into it, and you will find that a prophet does not come out of galilee."
be dammed up
for there are three that testify:
to plant rice out of season
recently
“the jewish people all know the way i have lived ever since i was a child, from the beginning of my life in my own country, and also in jerusalem.
use something with which to pick up something else
but peter kept on knocking, and when they opened the door and saw him, they were astonished.
for a raft, there are two cross pieces which are tied to the outriggers.
finally, the woman died too.
edible ferns
it was kept a secret from us.
there is a lot of dust when there are many vehicles which pass by on the road that is not cemented.
feed the fire under what’s cooking.
loosen
run away
and in him you too are being built together to become a dwelling in which god lives by his spirit.
black sugar ant.
they mimic us when we talk.
cause to happen.
they are banding together to attack a certain house.
paddle of canoe
who through faith conquered kingdoms, administered justice, and gained what was promised; who shut the mouths of lions,
enoch, the seventh from adam, prophesied about these men: "see, the lord is coming with thousands upon thousands of his holy ones
natural state
when it was almost time for the jewish passover, many went up from the country to jerusalem for their ceremonial cleansing before the passover.
loincloth, g-string.
so i will very gladly spend for you everything i have and expend myself as well. if i love you more, will you love me less?
kind of small bird
the spirit you received does not make you slaves, so that you live in fear again; rather, the spirit you received brought about your adoption to sonship. and by him we cry, “abba, father.”
jesus said, "my kingdom is not of this world. if it were, my servants would fight to prevent my arrest by the jews. but now my kingdom is from another place."
some men brought to him a paralyzed man, lying on a mat. when jesus saw their faith, he said to the man, “take heart, son; your sins are forgiven.”
all without exception
what good will it be for someone to gain the whole world, yet forfeit their soul? or what can anyone give in exchange for their soul?
if we’re young, they take advantage of us and give us just a little bit.
truly i tell you, it will be more bearable for sodom and gomorrah on the day of judgment than for that town.
for it is written: “be glad, barren woman, you who never bore a child; shout for joy and cry aloud, you who were never in labor; because more are the children of the desolate woman than of her who has a husband.”
offer hospitality to one another without grumbling.
my uncle is occupied by the building of his house. that is what he pays attention to first.
when he has done this, then the son himself will be made subject to him who put everything under him, so that god may be all in all.
whoever has ears, let them hear.”
middle of night, or zenith of moon
axe
consider therefore the kindness and sternness of god: sternness to those who fell, but kindness to you, provided that you continue in his kindness. otherwise, you also will be cut off.
there is a [type of] swelling which does not have a head [lit. eye]. that is a blind boil which gets very large and is a difficult kind of illness which people have.
“go away! what do you want with us, jesus of nazareth? have you come to destroy us? i know who you are—the holy one of god!”
be embarrassed
so then, brothers and sisters, stand firm and hold fast to the teachings we passed on to you, whether by word of mouth or by letter.
line on one’s palm
he fled naked, leaving his garment behind.
kind of rat with a white tail tip
glisten
but even if we or an angel from heaven should preach a gospel other than the one we preached to you, let them be under god’s curse!
a fistful is taking a large handful of food.
mosquito larvae.
curved knife
"i tell you the truth, i will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until that day when i drink it anew in the kingdom of god."
view something
you blind guides! you strain out a gnat but swallow a camel.
among them are hymenaeus and alexander, whom i have handed over to satan to be taught not to blaspheme.
then the jews said, "see how he loved him!"
i have given you authority to trample on snakes and scorpions and to overcome all the power of the enemy; nothing will harm you.
we will warm ourselves by a fire if we are chilled.
cook the pork by boiling
the [piece of] wood which is a lever, that is the thing used for leverage is put beneath [the log which one intends to move]
clear throat
they drove out many demons and anointed many sick people with oil and healed them.
dog which bites
yet i hold this against you: you have forsaken the love you had at first.
cut individual leaves
was brought back to life
to go and look at something or someone, to check on something
to keep looking down carefully; watch
“very truly i tell you, whoever believes in me will do the works i have been doing, and they will do even greater things than these, because i am going to the father.”
when jesus had finished saying all these things, he said to his disciples,
because of the present crisis, i think that it is good for a man to remain as he is.
to harden, stiffen, as in rigor mortis
then he said to her, “daughter, your faith has healed you. go in peace.”
stretch or hold out one’s hand
deceived
our house was sheltered by the library.
"blessed are those who wash their robes, that they may have the right to the tree of life and may go through the gates into the city.
(they still did not understand from scripture that jesus had to rise from the dead.)
at that time herod the tetrarch heard the reports about jesus,
to signify or use something as a guarantee
a person would say something like, "what is that dog after?"
no one has ever seen god, but the one and only son, who is himself god and is in closest relationship with the father, has made him known.
but some of them became obstinate; they refused to believe and publicly maligned the way. so paul left them. he took the disciples with him and had discussions daily in the lecture hall of tyrannus.
i’ll use [the pieces of your hair to lengthen out my own.
"take away the stone," he said. "but, lord," said martha, the sister of the dead man, "by this time there is a bad odor, for he has been there four days."
walking stick;
yes, and i ask you, loyal yokefellow, help these women who have contended at my side in the cause of the gospel, along with clement and the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
cracked
but i tell you, do not resist an evil person. if anyone slaps you on the right cheek, turn to them the other cheek also.
anyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life in him.
consequently, faith comes from hearing the message, and the message is heard through the word about christ.
astringent
to become wrinkled
quick-burning
and among the lampstands was someone "like a son of man," dressed in a robe reaching down to his feet and with a golden sash around his chest.
i thank my god every time i remember you.
they discussed it among themselves and said, "if we say, 'from heaven,' he will ask, 'then why didn't you believe him?'
finally, brothers and sisters, rejoice! strive for full restoration, encourage one another, be of one mind, live in peace. and the god of love and peace will be with you.
when they finished, james spoke up. “brothers,” he said, “listen to me.
throb, as a headache or stomach pain
so then, let us not be like others, who are asleep, but let us be awake and sober.
beeswax
when we hunt for frogs, when we see the eggs of the frog, we will just find the mother [frog] because she will be there closely watching over her eggs.
when i took my daughter down river, it wasn't until six o'clock in the morning when she was operated on.
i, paul, write this greeting in my own hand.
shine brightly, as the sun
and he said to them: "you have a fine way of setting aside the commands of god in order to observe your own traditions!
“on that day you will realize that i am in my father, and you are in me, and i am in you.”
deliberately squash
when we are holding a child in our arms and he lets his back bend back, the child is leaning back and over [against one's arms].
to get something in the eye
transparent
whitest
‘these people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me.
from him the whole body, joined and held together by every supporting ligament, grows and builds itself up in love, as each part does its work.
the power of the horses was in their mouths and in their tails; for their tails were like snakes, having heads with which they inflict injury.
he sent still another, and that one they killed. he sent many others; some of them they beat, others they killed.
to beat something with one drumstick (on a hanging gong)
for john baptized with water, but in a few days you will be baptized with the holy spirit.”
while jesus was still talking to the crowd, his mother and brothers stood outside, wanting to speak to him.
how can you be so calm!
do not take revenge, my friends, but leave room for god's wrath, for it is written: "it is mine to avenge; i will repay," says the lord.
jesus answered, “it is written: ‘man shall not live on bread alone.’”
hold or carry more than one thing at the same time
and we have seen and testify that the father has sent his son to be the savior of the world.
his master replied, ‘well done, good and faithful servant! you have been faithful with a few things; i will put you in charge of many things. come and share your master’s happiness!’
motivate
when we die, our possessions are simply left behind and cannot be taken where we will be after we die.
smell of burning hair or flesh
the pole is held onto.
as it is, it is no longer i myself who do it, but it is sin living in me.
"to the angel of the church in laodicea write: these are the words of the amen, the faithful and true witness, the ruler of god's creation.
the teachers of the law and the pharisees brought in a woman caught in adultery. they made her stand before the group
truly i tell you, anyone who will not receive the kingdom of god like a little child will never enter it.”
for the kingdom of god is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of righteousness, peace and joy in the holy spirit,
slender
beautiful
now to each one the manifestation of the spirit is given for the common good.
bigger
strength (physical)
but about that day or hour no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, nor the son, but only the father.
from perga they went on to pisidian antioch. on the sabbath they entered the synagogue and sat down.
messy hair
to fall landing in sitting position
"my soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death," he said to them. "stay here and keep watch."
the child will get the medicine from it’s mother’s milk.
as for people, [they] are born ihere in the world
then it goes and takes with it seven other spirits more wicked than itself, and they go in and live there. and the final condition of that person is worse than the first. that is how it will be with this wicked generation.”
and he went outside and wept bitterly.
annoy
for this reason they could not believe, because, as isaiah says elsewhere:
carry an object in the arms
when he had led them out to the vicinity of bethany, he lifted up his hands and blessed them.
that word "teach" doesn't fit the context because the concept was a result of rebellion.
the pig which i am giving to you is being used to open the door to inquiry to jog your memory if you have forgotten that which is mine that is, an unpaid debt for help with a bride price?
the centurion heard of jesus and sent some elders of the jews to him, asking him to come and heal his servant.
watch closely
what is she paying you?
the apostles and the believers throughout judea heard that the gentiles also had received the word of god.
a number who had practiced sorcery brought their scrolls together and burned them publicly. when they calculated the value of the scrolls, the total came to fifty thousand drachmas.
dear friends, do not be surprised at the painful trial you are suffering, as though something strange were happening to you.
“two people owed money to a certain moneylender. one owed him five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
let your conversation be always full of grace, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how to answer everyone.
move around.
devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful and thankful.
as for aluminum roofing which is very thin, it easily becomes dented when we step on it as we are using it to make a roof.
to slouch
eat well or eat a lot
gentle and of good character
the person who is purchasing an axe, he will be slow in looking because the one that is best , [that is the one] he will buy.
we took such a violent battering from the storm that the next day they began to throw the cargo overboard.
mildew
kind of large hornbill with a black body and light tan head
when the sun goes down, darkness covers the earth.
but if you do marry, you have not sinned; and if a virgin marries, she has not sinned. but those who marry will face many troubles in this life, and i want to spare you this.
if it is pounded, a can will become crushed.
not yet ripe; unripe.
so in christ we, though many, form one body, and each member belongs to all the others.
but jesus remained silent and gave no answer. again the high priest asked him, "are you the christ, the son of the blessed one?"
if there is someone who collects payment for a horse but it has been sold on credit, the one who has received the horse can use anything for payment.
now the body is not made up of one part but of many.
meanwhile we groan, longing to be clothed instead with our heavenly dwelling,
for surely it is not angels he helps, but abraham’s descendants.
a chicken which has laid eggs, sets [on its eggs] for fifteen days or sixteen days before [they] crack open.
the manipulation of a baby's position before and during the birthing process.
the field which has been rained on for three days becomes dry and crackling when it has been drying in the sun for three days.
python.
jesus looked at them and said, "with man this is impossible, but not with god; all things are possible with god."
as for a person exalting himself, when in a discussion, he loudly brags and says, "my own name is that which is able to lift up our companion who is overwhelmed by a problem."
receive.
now the first covenant had regulations for worship and also an earthly sanctuary.
roast meat
to clap
when a person has become drunk, he will become sober when he wakes up. he will recover; he won't be drunk.
when they had finished eating, jesus said to simon peter, “simon son of john, do you love me more than these?” “yes, lord,” he said, “you know that i love you.” jesus said, “feed my lambs.”
don't take anything; we'll be seen.
instead, speaking the truth in love, we will grow to become in every respect the mature body of him who is the head, that is, christ.
when elizabeth heard mary’s greeting, the baby leaped in her womb, and elizabeth was filled with the holy spirit.
dam
next
so if the whole church comes together and everyone speaks in tongues, and some who do not understand or some unbelievers come in, will they not say that you are out of your mind?
when we heat water, we set it aside because we allow the water to cool off.
tooth; kernels of corn on a cob.
then i saw three impure spirits that looked like frogs; they came out of the mouth of the dragon, out of the mouth of the beast and out of the mouth of the false prophet.
for it is time for judgment to begin with the family of god; and if it begins with us, what will the outcome be for those who do not obey the gospel of god?
now then, you and the sanhedrin petition the commander to bring him before you on the pretext of wanting more accurate information about his case. we are ready to kill him before he gets here."
then a voice came from heaven, "i have glorified it, and will glorify it again." the crowd that was there and heard it said it had thundered; others said an angel had spoken to him.
those who led the way rebuked him and told him to be quiet, but he shouted all the more, “son of david, have mercy on me!”
knock
fall off
when they heard this, they were furious and began shouting: "great is artemis of the ephesians!"
jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of the boy, and he was healed at that moment.
they took turns carrying the pig.
turn around
for this is what the lord has commanded us: ‘i have made you a light for the gentiles, that you may bring salvation to the ends of the earth.’”
finally, brothers, pray for us that the message of the lord may spread rapidly and be honored, just as it was with you.
summit of a mountain
throw a temper tantrum
after all, if you were cut out of an olive tree that is wild by nature, and contrary to nature were grafted into a cultivated olive tree, how much more readily will these, the natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree!
take refuge
a mother dog, it plays with its puppy.
if, then, demetrius and his fellow craftsmen have a grievance against anybody, the courts are open and there are proconsuls. they can press charges.
shallow glass bowls
close associate
to intentionally swallow
and he told them this parable: "the ground of a certain rich man produced a good crop.
but paul shook the snake off into the fire and suffered no ill effects.
stay just one night at some location,
revenge
if there would be someone who would ask who your companion is, they would say, “we are just a married couple. we don't have any children yet.”
a kind of fish
but they did not find any, though many false witnesses came forward. finally two came forward
just go around because there is a log in the way.
but if christ is in you, then even though your body is subject to death because of sin, the spirit gives life because of righteousness.
in the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying, "this cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you.
as for the trees, their trunks (lit. bodies) are very big and they were many; they haven’t yet been decreased.
for the mighty one has done great things for me—holy is his name.
we proclaim him, admonishing and teaching everyone with all wisdom, so that we may present everyone perfect in christ.
this is indeed a python.
but encourage one another daily, as long as it is called “today,” so that none of you may be hardened by sin’s deceitfulness.
john’s disciples told him about all these things. calling two of them,
jesus answered, "it is the one to whom i will give this piece of bread when i have dipped it in the dish." then, dipping the piece of bread, he gave it to judas iscariot, son of simon.
go down
now herod had arrested john and bound him and put him in prison because of herodias, his brother philip’s wife,  for john had been saying to him: “it is not lawful for you to have her.”  herod wanted to kill john, but he was afraid of the people, because they considered him a prophet.
knock
jesus answered, "i tell you, peter, before the rooster crows today, you will deny three times that you know me."
remove a thorn by scraping or pressing
yet at the same time many even among the leaders believed in him. but because of the pharisees they would not confess their faith for fear they would be put out of the synagogue;
squeeze
who disobeyed long ago when god waited patiently in the days of noah while the ark was being built. in it only a few people, eight in all, were saved through water,
immediately he received his sight and followed jesus, praising god. when all the people saw it, they also praised god.
grasp hold of
but jesus would not entrust himself to them, for he knew all people.
pound with small pestle, such as tobacco or betelnut
and they used them to buy the potter’s field, as the lord commanded me.”
wall, as of a house or building.
clean
and i will keep on doing what i am doing in order to cut the ground from under those who want an opportunity to be considered equal with us in the things they boast about.
but if a widow has children or grandchildren, these should learn first of all to put their religion into practice by caring for their own family and so repaying their parents and grandparents, for this is pleasing to god.
and this is what he promised us--even eternal life.
jesus answered, “don’t you know me, philip, even after i have been among you such a long time? anyone who has seen me has seen the father. how can you say, ‘show us the father’?”
even in the case of lifeless things that make sounds, such as the pipe or harp, how will anyone know what tune is being played unless there is a distinction in the notes?
to throw away.
as for people who swim underwater, they hold their breath as they swim underwater as they search for fish to see whether there are some they can encounter there under the water.
and when the time for the burning of incense came, all the assembled worshipers were praying outside.
warrior.
parent of a child's spouse
then they offered him wine mixed with myrrh, but he did not take it.
following
flashlight
a mediator, however, implies more than one party; but god is one.
when jim took our picture and when it was finished, he gave us our picture.
they replied, "let one of us sit at your right and the other at your left in your glory."
comfort
snug
height
he entered the house of god, and he and his companions ate the consecrated bread—which was not lawful for them to do, but only for the priests.
but zacchaeus stood up and said to the lord, "look, lord! here and now i give half of my possessions to the poor, and if i have cheated anybody out of anything, i will pay back four times the amount."
"abraham is our father," they answered. "if you were abraham's children," said jesus, "then you would
umbilical cord
after the people saw the miraculous sign that jesus did, they began to say, "surely this is the prophet who is to come into the world."
the grown up aliwas, it is a male monkey.
when we finish off the last bits of food from a pot, we scrape the crust of the rice from the pot.
paul stood up, motioned with his hand and said: “fellow israelites and you gentiles who worship god, listen to me!
as for the expression amba-an, two or three people line up one after another to float on some object.
contrary to what one might expect
with one voice they cried out, "away with this man! release barabbas to us!"
when they saw the courage of peter and john and realized that they were unschooled, ordinary men, they were astonished and they took note that these men had been with jesus.
fish trap made of bamboo
it will be good for that servant whom the master finds doing so when he returns.
i can do everything through him who gives me strength.
as for the house of a person which was leaning due to a strong wind, it was braced by its owner so that his house would not fall over.
if we look carefully into water which is clear, we have a reflection there below us.
buy
narrow wooden shield
peter declared, "even if all fall away, i will not."
fall flat on one’s face on the ground.
carefully
when jesus had again crossed over by boat to the other side of the lake, a large crowd gathered around him while he was by the lake.
shave off hair or feathers using a knife, razor, or sharp object
they went out from us, but they did not really belong to us. for if they had belonged to us, they would have remained with us; but their going showed that none of them belonged to us.
to stir around a liquid
pass by
pebbly or bumpy surface
reach some place.
but when the tenants saw the son, they said to each other, ‘this is the heir. come, let’s kill him and take his inheritance.’
he answered, "i have told you already and you did not listen. why do you want to hear it again? do you want to become his disciples, too?"
the tenants seized his servants; they beat one, killed another, and stoned a third.
if the afternoon of a day is nice and the time is around five in the afternoon and the clouds are red, [there is] a sunset.
but the people there did not welcome him, because he was heading for jerusalem.
a cut field, of rice or other grain; year
five of them were foolish and five were wise.
to block as an inlet from a river to drain area and catch fish in traps
humble yourselves, therefore, under god's mighty hand, that he may lift you up in due time.
get out of the way; step to the side of the path so a horse or person may go by.
it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of god."
we’ll let the water return
why?
live such good lives among the pagans that, though they accuse you of doing wrong, they may see your good deeds and glorify god on the day he visits us.
one might even say that levi, who collects the tenth, paid the tenth through abraham,
let this christ, this king of israel, come down now from the cross, that we may see and believe." those crucified with him also heaped insults on him.
you killed the author of life, but god raised him from the dead. we are witnesses of this.
kind of red rice
imply
then mary took about a pint of pure nard, an expensive perfume; she poured it on jesus’ feet and wiped his feet with her hair. and the house was filled with the fragrance of the perfume.
preach the word; be prepared in season and out of season; correct, rebuke and encourage—with great patience and careful instruction.
well-behaved
blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
and he who searches our hearts knows the mind of the spirit, because the spirit intercedes for god’s people in accordance with the will of god.
it was for the sake of the name that they went out, receiving no help from the pagans.
i’m going to box you.
for prophecy never had its origin in the will of man, but men spoke from god as they were carried along by the holy spirit.
he who belongs to god hears what god says. the reason you do not hear is that you do not belong to god."
you who boast in the law, do you dishonor god by breaking the law?
going to pilate, he asked for jesus’ body, and pilate ordered that it be given to him.
if the baby in the abdomen has been properly positioned ahead of time, the mother will have it easier when she gives birth.
if he let it go, he intended to release the dog.
peter replied, “repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of jesus christ for the forgiveness of your sins. and you will receive the gift of the holy spirit.
this is a lake that has no outlet for the water.
humble yourselves, therefore, under god's mighty hand, that he may lift you up in due time.
“after forty years had passed, an angel appeared to moses in the flames of a burning bush in the desert near mount sinai.
the woman said, “i know that messiah” (called christ) “is coming. when he comes, he will explain everything to us.”
buntit is keeping vigil over likanay’s body.
twenty
neither was man created for woman, but woman for man.
mussed up (as of hair)
for john had been saying to herod, "it is not lawful for you to have your brother's wife."
remove clothing; go naked
so therefore the owner took back the mother pig.
by faith abel offered god a better sacrifice than cain did. by faith he was commended as a righteous man, when god spoke well of his offerings. and by faith he still speaks, even though he is dead.
tall
shiver because of cold
as for [the word] aboy “assumption” one can assume correctly or incorrectly.
a red wild chicken which has a loud crow is called batug.
confront
and also some women who had been cured of evil spirits and diseases: mary (called magdalene) from whom seven demons had come out;
immediately jesus made the disciples get into the boat and go on ahead of him to the other side, while he dismissed the crowd.
there are also heavenly bodies and there are earthly bodies; but the splendor of the heavenly bodies is one kind, and the splendor of the earthly bodies is another.
therefore, prepare your minds for action; be self-controlled; set your hope fully on the grace to be given you when jesus christ is revealed.
cut trees for lumber
jesus stopped and ordered the man to be brought to him. when he came near, jesus asked him,
fellow israelites, listen to this: jesus of nazareth was a man accredited by god to you by miracles, wonders and signs, which god did among you through him, as you yourselves know.
heaven and earth adjacent to each other.
no, new wine must be poured into new wineskins.
and they can no longer die; for they are like the angels. they are god's children, since they are children of the resurrection.
jesus did not answer a word. so his disciples came to him and urged him, “send her away, for she keeps crying out after us.”
fifty
"make level paths for your feet," so that the lame may not be disabled, but rather healed.
unfurl, untie, translate; unravel.
in a vision he has seen a man named ananias come and place his hands on him to restore his sight.”
he went into all the country around the jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
if not, what did you go out to see? a man dressed in fine clothes? no, those who wear expensive clothes and indulge in luxury are in palaces.
granted. but they were broken off because of unbelief, and you stand by faith. do not be arrogant, but be afraid.
but just as he who called you is holy, so be holy in all you do;
the student is not above the teacher, but everyone who is fully trained will be like their teacher.
to pack up
push or sweep aside
the hardworking farmer should be the first to receive a share of the crops.
split a tree
excert effort
a person who lacks good manners
near the hearer
mottled rice.
shingle
heaviest
loose
it is thundering loudly.
they all gave out of their wealth; but she, out of her poverty, put in everything--all she had to live on."
throw away
so whatever you believe about these things keep between yourself and god. blessed is the man who does not condemn himself by what he approves.
while jesus was having dinner at levi's house, many tax collectors and "sinners" were eating with him and his disciples, for there were many who followed him.
he who overcomes will inherit all this, and i will be his god and he will be my son.
one sabbath jesus was going through the grainfields, and as his disciples walked along, they began to pick some heads of grain.
suitable
the edge of the river which is flat in which reeds grow, that is soft soil ground.
so then, just as you received christ jesus as lord, continue to live your lives in him,
to leave behind (involuntarily)
book
meander, circle
dry
i
mouse.
what did you come for?
a cave in a mountain.
the soldiers therefore came and broke the legs of the first man who had been crucified with jesus, and then those of the other.
but he said to them, "it is i; don't be afraid."
successful
to be difficult
no one, then, should refuse to accept him. send him on his way in peace so that he may return to me. i am expecting him along with the brothers.
then barnabas went to tarsus to look for saul,
uvula
a kind of banana or sugarcane.
so they answered jesus, “we don’t know.” then he said, “neither will i tell you by what authority i am doing these things.
he/she is experiencing malaria.
your trust deceived you.
what business is it of mine to judge those outside the church? are you not to judge those inside? god will judge those outside. "expel the wicked man from among you."
and again in the passage above he says, “they shall never enter my rest.”
when you are persecuted in one place, flee to another. truly i tell you, you will not finish going through the towns of israel before the son of man comes.
short-legged
he had four unmarried daughters who prophesied.
"where do you want us to prepare for it?" they asked.
what are you keeping secret from me?
you’ll be overtaken by darkness
some people standing there asked, "what are you doing, untying that colt?"
boastful
seem like
“i am coming to you now, but i say these things while i am still in the world, so that they may have the full measure of my joy within them.”
for we have heard him say that this jesus of nazareth will destroy this place and change the customs moses handed down to us.”
kind of millet
raw, uncooked, unripe.
his house.
scrape
shine brightly, as the sun
tychicus will tell you all the news about me. he is a dear brother, a faithful minister and fellow servant in the lord.
and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces of bread and fish.
when the jews who had been with mary in the house, comforting her, noticed how quickly she got up and went out, they followed her, supposing she was going to the tomb to mourn there.
guess, maybe
steam
bird blind consisting of a tree-house
the demons begged jesus, "send us among the pigs; allow us to go into them."
to pick one’s teeth.
give the portion to brother-in-law.
attend.
dance the baby.
talkative
but the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowd to ask for barabbas and to have jesus executed.
when he had placed his hands on them, he went on from there.
painful urination.
arrive at the same time
that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the scriptures,
isaiah cries out concerning israel: “though the number of the israelites be like the sand by the sea, only the remnant will be saved.
when you fish with a spear, you watch for the silver-colored fish when it is still far away. when it passes near, you spear it as you jab/thrust at it.
newly
and jesus healed many who had various diseases. he also drove out many demons, but he would not let the demons speak because they knew who he was.
live as free men, but do not use your freedom as a cover-up for evil; live as servants of god.
then paul made his defense: “i have done nothing wrong against the jewish law or against the temple or against caesar.”
to become blurry, as a computer screen
for god is not a god of disorder but of peace.
now, brothers and sisters, i have applied these things to myself and apollos for your benefit, so that you may learn from us the meaning of the saying, “do not go beyond what is written.” then you will not be puffed up in being a follower of one of us over against the other.
to rip
to rot from water
for we are to god the aroma of christ among those who are being saved and those who are perishing
mature
don’t eat from the same leaf; eat separately.
the men would be enticed. in my opinion, that isn't appropriate.
the dogs will bark at us.
they will fall by the sword and will be taken as prisoners to all the nations. jerusalem will be trampled on by the gentiles until the times of the gentiles are fulfilled.
also before the throne there was what looked like a sea of glass, clear as crystal.
rainbow.
to be passed down, as some characteristic or authority which is recognized in someone's descendant.
"don't be alarmed," he said. "you are looking for jesus the nazarene, who was crucified. he has risen! he is not here. see the place where they laid him.
life
the circumcised believers who had come with peter were astonished that the gift of the holy spirit had been poured out even on gentiles.
look back over one’s shoulder
for you were like sheep going astray, but now you have returned to the shepherd and overseer of your souls.
wiggle one’s scalp.
let us behave decently, as in the daytime, not in orgies and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and debauchery, not in dissension and jealousy.
how often
hen we strike and then a welt forms on the skin, and that has become the rat which climbed up his arm. that is the rat game.
then the angel said to me, "the waters you saw, where the prostitute sits, are peoples, multitudes, nations and languages.
to be reached
what is my offense?
won’t he rather say, ‘prepare my supper, get yourself ready and wait on me while i eat and drink; after that you may eat and drink’?
let no debt remain outstanding, except the continuing debt to love one another, for whoever loves others has fulfilled the law.
to bury in soil, as a body or other item; cemetery
be darkened or obscured, as the sun
to succeed, accomplish
for the pagan world runs after all such things, and your father knows that you need them.
other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the plants.
they’ll plunder our clothing after murdering us.
be wise in the way you act toward outsiders; make the most of every opportunity.
to teach
all the people in the synagogue were furious when they heard this.
i will make a storage shelter for corn.
blowfly
i took the camote leaves together with the sugarcane and planted them around the root of a stump.
to be energetic when walking
the flavor is different.
filmy skin covering corn, beans, eggs, or organs
teacher
opposed to
this proposal pleased the whole group. they chose stephen, a man full of faith and of the holy spirit; also philip, procorus, nicanor, timon, parmenas, and nicolas from antioch, a convert to judaism.
teach slaves to be subject to their masters in everything, to try to please them, not to talk back to them,
tungonu is the oldest, after him comes dusing's mother, after dusing's mother comes luluy's mother.
give a portion
be surrounded
i want you to know how much i am struggling for you and for those at laodicea, and for all who have not met me personally.
hair (poetic term)
while apollos was at corinth, paul took the road through the interior and arrived at ephesus. there he found some disciples
king agrippa, do you believe the prophets? i know you do."
we made temporary use of minor’s house because our house wasn’t yet finished
when simon peter saw this, he fell at jesus’ knees and said, “go away from me, lord; i am a sinful man!”
trick
for the spine to protrude
and when jesus had cried out again in a loud voice, he gave up his spirit.
by faith the prostitute rahab, because she welcomed the spies, was not killed with those who were disobedient.
when they had crucified him, they divided up his clothes by casting lots.
heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
but the lord stood at my side and gave me strength, so that through me the message might be fully proclaimed and all the gentiles might hear it. and i was delivered from the lion's mouth.
you didn’t spend much time putting the posts, and you were finished.
you will not be able to take the horse unless you have an agreement as to when you will pay for it in full.
they have made a commitment  [to each other] because their affections are the same. they have come to agreement with each other. they desire each other. the attraction between the two of them is mutual.
then i heard a loud voice in heaven say: “now have come the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our god, and the authority of his messiah. for the accuser of our brothers and sisters, who accuses them before our god day and night, has been hurled down.
we wrinkle our eyebrows when we have just awakened.
now a man named lazarus was sick. he was from bethany, the village of mary and her sister martha.
therefore rejoice, you heavens and you who dwell in them! but woe to the earth and the sea, because the devil has gone down to you! he is filled with fury, because he knows that his time is short.”
many people, because they had heard that he had performed this sign, went out to meet him.
that person said, “i admit that it was really me who stole from you.”
there was someone here who resembled the younger sister of elena and i saw her pass by the road. it triggered loneliness in me because her walk and her face resembled elena's younger sister.
toy or game
then i went to syria and cilicia.
with many similar parables jesus spoke the word to them, as much as they could understand.
they brought them before the magistrates and said, “these men are jews, and are throwing our city into an uproar.”
skull.
the water of a side channel flows through and joins  the body [of the river].  it is called the junction of the rivers.
if for example [there is] a sack of rice, [if] you tell a person, "divide it in half" he will take half.
intestinal worm of a fish.
a cap for a roof made of grass, it will soon deteriorate.
to love him with all your heart, with all your understanding and with all your strength, and to love your neighbor as yourself is more important than all burnt offerings and sacrifices."
he testifies to what he has seen and heard, but no one accepts his testimony.
but i will stay on at ephesus until pentecost,
we’ll dig sweet potatoes to eat with the monkey later on.
pound
"from childhood," he answered. "it has often thrown him into fire or water to kill him. but if you can do anything, take pity on us and help us."
"that it may go well with you and that you may enjoy long life on the earth."
then the jews led jesus from caiaphas to the palace of the roman governor. by now it was early morning, and to avoid ceremonial uncleanness the jews did not enter the palace; they wanted to be able to eat the passover.
cracked
to plant
when the chief priests had met with the elders and devised a plan, they gave the soldiers a large sum of money,
but you are not to be like that. instead, the greatest among you should be like the youngest, and the one who rules like the one who serves.
when jesus spoke again to the people, he said, “i am the light of the world. whoever follows me will never walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.”
a person who is making a field, has an ending of the edge of his field and that is how far he will allow his field to extend.
the spirit, the water and the blood; and the three are in agreement.
as for the unmarried men and the unmarried women, if there is a necklace or a bracelet of a leg band which they covet, they will be quick to ask for it.
but they laughed at him.
he will bring you a message through which you and all your household will be saved.’
when a gentle south wind began to blow, they thought they had obtained what they wanted; so they weighed anchor and sailed along the shore of crete.
he also says, “in the beginning, lord, you laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of your hands.
now when they have finished their testimony, the beast that comes up from the abyss will attack them, and overpower and kill them.
and besides all this, between us and you a great chasm has been set in place, so that those who want to go from here to you cannot, nor can anyone cross over from there to us.’
jesus went up on a mountainside and called to him those he wanted, and they came to him.
do something alone
for you can all prophesy in turn so that everyone may be instructed and encouraged.
the fire of the large trees keeps burning/smoldering. it will not be extinguished until the wood is consumed.
name of a village on the upper liboganon river between banualoy and langilan.
for truly i tell you, many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.
chicken carrier made of rattan
groom's family takes bride to their home after marriage
to become marked by an impression from something
when [the corn] flowers and bears ears, and if the flower(s) wilt, it indicates  that the corn is being blighted/diseased.
a small burrow going out from main burrow where an eel keeps its young.
we encourage the one singing love songs [by saying], “continue singing love songs.”
but seek his kingdom, and these things will be given to you as well.
pop like popcorn
groggy
as for a woman who is newly pregnant, if she cannot eat what she is craving for, the pregnancy will be terminated because the baby will come out.
and saw two angels in white, seated where jesus’ body had been, one at the head and the other at the foot.
about the radio, if we set it on the floor, if there are children who play, it is likely that it will be stepped or become destroyed.
i will beg some of your palm tree fiber because i will make it into kindling so that we will have a fire.
regarding a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space
they put a purple robe on him, then twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on him.
“you are israel’s teacher,” said jesus, “and do you not understand these things?
a fern-like plant which has a hairy body and stems.
when the time came for the purification rites required by the law of moses, joseph and mary took him to jerusalem to present him to the lord
“which ones?” he inquired. jesus replied, “‘you shall not murder, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal, you shall not give false testimony,
if he ignores this, he himself will be ignored.
read.
this is especially true of those who follow the corrupt desire of the sinful nature and despise authority
and that he may send the messiah, who has been appointed for you—even jesus.
begin; starting point
“therefore, my friends, i want you to know that through jesus the forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you.
name of a creek.
all who rely on observing the law are under a curse, for it is written: "cursed is everyone who does not continue to do everything written in the book of the law."
a mother dog, it plays with its puppy.
not at all! let god be true, and every human being a liar. as it is written: “so that you may be proved right when you speak and prevail when you judge.”
sic chickens on each other
we are experiencing good things.
fetch wood
many rebuked him and told him to be quiet, but he shouted all the more, "son of david, have mercy on me!"
according to the lord's own word, we tell you that we who are still alive, who are left till the coming of the lord, will certainly not precede those who have fallen asleep.
she says that her rice will be wasted because she cannot finish weeding the field.
by faith noah, when warned about things not yet seen, in holy fear built an ark to save his family. by his faith he condemned the world and became heir of the righteousness that is in keeping with faith.
when we look down at someone, we are continually seeing the person but we don't let him see us so that we will not be recognized.
whole kernels cut from a corncob
help me pound the rice.
resist being cut
stop for a minute
then he said to the man, “stretch out your hand.” so he stretched it out and it was completely restored, just as sound as the other.
go around
yes
sea; ocean
accept one another, then, just as christ accepted you, in order to bring praise to god.
manner of living
hand of bananas.
show me your faith without deeds, and i will show you my faith by what i do. you believe that there is one god. good! even the demons believe that-- and shudder.
jesus replied: “‘love the lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.’
to urge to do or to accept something
squeeze past others, as in a crowd
they all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
under
shortcut
he said: “in a certain town there was a judge who neither feared god nor cared what people thought.
frustrated
something white on an uncircumcised child's penis which separates the flesh from the foreskin and makes circumcision easier.
teachable, quick to understand
“all that belongs to the father is mine. that is why i said the spirit will receive from me what he will make known to you.”
i was over-occupied because i had guests and i had guests who had arrived at my place.  as for my work, i had not completed it yet because there wasnt time. i was taken away [from my work] by my guests.
in the following directives i have no praise for you, for your meetings do more harm than good.
people who have talabubung familiar spirits anticipate that they will be transported to heaven.
long, straight mountain ridge
we eat salad raw.
they exchanged the truth about god for a lie, and worshiped and served created things rather than the creator—who is forever praised. amen.
it is burdensome to travel. we don't feel like traveling (lit. feel lazy/weary to travel). we won't follow through if we feel weary.
develop well, as a plant
small yellow fruit
so we fix our eyes not on what is seen, but on what is unseen. for what is seen is temporary, but what is unseen is eternal.
and would not allow anyone to carry merchandise through the temple courts.
"his master replied, 'i will judge you by your own words, you wicked servant! you knew, did you, that i am a hard man, taking out what i did not put in, and reaping what i did not sow?
then pilate asked him, “don’t you hear the testimony they are bringing against you?”
"he replied, 'i tell you that to everyone who has, more will be given, but as for the one who has nothing, even what he has will be taken away.
dove’s call, believed to predict future events
once i was alive apart from the law; but when the commandment came, sin sprang to life and i died.
since we have now been justified by his blood, how much more shall we be saved from god’s wrath through him!
cleaned area of ground, yard
so those who rely on faith are blessed along with abraham, the man of faith.
to the jews who had believed him, jesus said, "if you hold to my teaching, you are really my disciples.
but his followers took him by night and lowered him in a basket through an opening in the wall.
for as lightning that comes from the east is visible even in the west, so will be the coming of the son of man.
when they came to jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church and the apostles and elders, to whom they reported everything god had done through them.
disintegrate
then he asked them, "if one of you has a son or an ox that falls into a well on the sabbath day, will you not immediately pull him out?"
see to it, brothers and sisters, that none of you has a sinful, unbelieving heart that turns away from the living god.
hold back
scratch or rub a body part against an object due to itching
the person who died was caused to meet a disaster because he had accompanied the others.
but made himself nothing, taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness.
plural particle; "and"; "approximately"
if anyone has ears to hear, let him hear."
as for an electric light, when its brightness is removed it goes out.
but you are not to be called ‘rabbi,’ for you have one teacher, and you are all brothers.
paul, an apostle—sent not from men nor by a man, but by jesus christ and god the father, who raised him from the dead— and all the brothers and sisters with me, to the churches in galatia:
when the single length of bamboo is pulled up, if it is full of earth, its sign is good because the rice will be plentiful.
so then really she is also my daughter-in-law
then a cloud appeared and enveloped them, and a voice came from the cloud: "this is my son, whom i love. listen to him!"
no! but this mob that knows nothing of the law--there is a curse on them."
if our companion is carrying something heavy, we will come alongside to help.
and now, brothers, we want you to know about the grace that god has given the macedonian churches.
he spoke plainly about this, and peter took him aside and began to rebuke him.
for a while
to make several purchase transactions
the wood resists being cut; it’s solid.
to line up one after another
the person with good character: he isn’t a liar, doesn’t gossip, is afraid to do bad things, and humbles himself.
we will let our companion know that we have guests who have arrived.
someone took away a half portion of my land. a half portion is a half.
[when the it inches forward], the baby moves a little.
that talk didn’t hit the mark.
the grace of our lord was poured out on me abundantly, along with the faith and love that are in christ jesus.
so when the samaritans came to him, they urged him to stay with them, and he stayed two days.
on reaching jerusalem, jesus entered the temple area and began driving out those who were buying and selling there. he overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves,
what she was sewing was completed.
therefore, strengthen your feeble arms and weak knees.
as for a thermometer, the fluid (lit. water) in it falls orrises toward the top.
and then he was called so that he would face that person from whom he had stolen
but because jesus lives forever, he has a permanent priesthood.
they saw what seemed to be tongues of fire that separated and came to rest on each of them.
stage of rice growth (about 2 feet high)
i will borrow your saw because i will use [it] to cut off[the ends] of wood.
these things happened so that the scripture would be fulfilled: "not one of his bones will be broken,"
it is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you, and of a kind that does not occur even among pagans: a man has his father's wife.
then they secretly persuaded some men to say, “we have heard stephen speak blasphemous words against moses and against god.”
now if i do what i do not want to do, it is no longer i who do it, but it is sin living in me that does it.
then levi held a great banquet for jesus at his house, and a large crowd of tax collectors and others were eating with them.
disappointed
advice or teaching
when they have finished sacrificing the pig, they eat it.
"in contrast to" something else (tigwanan dialect for atag)
a tagan, comes from bamboo and is a container for lime.
at that [time] when i returned from davao when my head had been operated on, we planted rice.
to shout
the soldiers also came up and mocked him. they offered him wine vinegar
contents
waning noon.
happen close together
enough.
unhusked rice
narrow passage between two cliffs on the kabungabungan creek.
in the same way the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders mocked him.
lie around
take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of god.
beads, necklace
cover or lid
the grace of the lord jesus be with you.
a kind of large fish.
the fishing basket is that in which the catch of fish, etc, is placed.
to experience.
but jesus called the children to him and said, “let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of god belongs to such as these.
he who has an ear, let him hear.
to discuss marriage arrangements
to consider
baby blanket
an awl
if we go inside a cavern, there will be light in front of us
they love the place of honor at banquets and the most important seats in the synagogues;
“i am the gate; whoever enters through me will be saved. they will come in and go out, and find pasture.”
lizard or iguana with yellow throat
the men were amazed and asked, “what kind of man is this? even the winds and the waves obey him!”
not to become easily unsettled or alarmed by the teaching allegedly from us—whether by a prophecy or by word of mouth or by letter—asserting that the day of the lord has already come.
peter, however, got up and ran to the tomb. bending over, he saw the strips of linen lying by themselves, and he went away, wondering to himself what had happened.
to ring, as of a bell.
when you went to visit lillian, you reached her while she was still at home, you found her at home.
famous.
we would like to request please that you take this for us-excl please.
steam
i cause my back to bend backwards when i lean back and over against something because my back hurts.
they have become filled with every kind of wickedness, evil, greed and depravity. they are full of envy, murder, strife, deceit and malice. they are gossips,
your attitude should be the same as that of christ jesus:
to kill someone to prevent him from arriving home safely
but each in his own turn: christ, the firstfruits; then, when he comes, those who belong to him.
look, he is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, even those who pierced him; and all the peoples of the earth will mourn because of him. so shall it be! amen.
tiny bell
confessing their sins, they were baptized by him in the jordan river.
randfather amasig was the one who was repeatedly telling me that we will be alert because raiders would come.
there are many kinds of variegated alik-ik plants in our place they are not used to make steamed bread from corn. the only kind that is used is the green alik-ik plant.
buntit is teaching someone how to weave a basket and she is watching the one she is teaching.
it is god’s will that you should be sanctified: that you should avoid sexual immorality;
they
when elena worked as a housegirl in davao, she was given instructions to pour water on the flowers.
you go to the festival. i am not going up to this festival, because my time has not yet fully come."
the alag nut is astringent when we chew it. it is used to stop bleeding if someone has been cut.
every day i was with you, teaching in the temple courts, and you did not arrest me. but the scriptures must be fulfilled."
yellow
this brought paul and barnabas into sharp dispute and debate with them. so paul and barnabas were appointed, along with some other believers, to go up to jerusalem to see the apostles and elders about this question.
meanwhile his disciples urged him, “rabbi, eat something.”
the sky will clear up; there are no more clouds.
dog
i praise you for remembering me in everything and for holding to the traditions just as i passed them on to you.
well-chewed chunk of tobacco.
then he said to them, “my soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death. stay here and keep watch with me.”
while they were worshiping the lord and fasting, the holy spirit said, “set apart for me barnabas and saul for the work to which i have called them.”
to have formed a scar.
may the grace of the lord jesus christ, and the love of god, and the fellowship of the holy spirit be with you all.
dung
lose one’s baby teeth
all the people saw this and began to mutter, "he has gone to be the guest of a 'sinner.' "
flock together to feed
when the flooded river water recedes, the thickness of the silt is a handspan deep.
if we go downstream by raft then we beach our raft where the water is calm and we don't beach it where at rapids because our raft will be swept away by the current. our raft will be carried by the current if we beach our craft at the rapids.
milk
mucus from the nose; having a runny nose
for by your words you will be acquitted, and by your words you will be condemned.”
a kind of hard bamboo used for flooring which has short joints and two lines at each joint with thorns
relentlessly pursue
as one who is in the lord jesus, i am fully convinced that no food is unclean in itself. but if anyone regards something as unclean, then for him it is unclean.
children, don’t peek at the one giving birth because you will get cataracts if you look at the afterbirth, and you will be cursed. when you grow up, you won’t be able to see.
to make a wheezy sound in a person’s lungs (who has pneumonia)
small girl
therefore, whoever takes the lowly position of this child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
so it is also stated elsewhere: ‘you will not let your holy one see decay.’
for i wrote you out of great distress and anguish of heart and with many tears, not to grieve you but to let you know the depth of my love for you.
whether it is high or short, thick or thin, if it is in the yard and surrounds a house or a yard, it is called a fense.
to move
meanwhile a large crowd of jews found out that jesus was there and came, not only because of him but also to see lazarus, whom he had raised from the dead.
your
if people do not welcome you, leave their town and shake the dust off your feet as a testimony against them.”
completed
custom, manners.
chaff of tiny broken rice chips (usually given to chickens)
soggy, mushy, sticky
pay.
and they began to call out to him, "hail, king of the jews!"
we
be devoted to one another in love. honor one another above yourselves.
i know what it is to be in need, and i know what it is to have plenty. i have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation, whether well fed or hungry, whether living in plenty or in want.
did the word of god originate with you? or are you the only people it has reached?
if the baby in the abdomen has been properly positioned ahead of time, the mother will have it easier when she gives birth.
because those will be days of distress unequaled from the beginning, when god created the world, until now--and never to be equaled again.
if the contents are removed, it will become hollow.
when there are raiders, those are the ones who attack and kill people.
it was preparation day, and the sabbath was about to begin.
we love because he first loved us.
for there is one god and one mediator between god and mankind, the man christ jesus,
walk single file
a tiny brilliant red bird with purple flocks on the head, has a long pointed black beak; said to live in a hole in the river bank
[some manuscripts include: “however, this kind does not go out except by prayer and fasting.”]
nobody should seek his own good, but the good of others.
he must also have a good reputation with outsiders, so that he will not fall into disgrace and into the devil’s trap.
as for the manobo's cross-like symbol, it has two crosspieces of wood and is used to mark a field to be cut.
when he had received the drink, jesus said, "it is finished." with that, he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.
neither of them had the money to pay him back, so he forgave the debts of both. now which of them will love him more?”
after this, paul left athens and went to corinth.
then he said to the man, “stretch out your hand.” so he stretched it out and it was completely restored, just as sound as the other.
slide the comb between the shingles
yours
anyone who loves their father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; anyone who loves their son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
tree vine used for bathing a baby
if for example [there is] a sack of rice, [if] you tell a person, "divide it in half" he will take half.
as jesus and his disciples were leaving jericho, a large crowd followed him.
stop with me in your giving; don’t give anyone else than me
hop
if there is someone who will come from kapalong for a visit, [he] will have us meet him at the junction [of ??] so that he can find our house so that he won't get lost
the coffin is being lowered
slant-eyed; lovely.
when you fast, do not look somber as the hypocrites do, for they disfigure their faces to show others they are fasting. truly i tell you, they have received their reward in full.
after jesus had sent the crowd away, he got into the boat and went to the vicinity of magadan.
again and again they struck him on the head with a staff and spit on him. falling on their knees, they paid homage to him.
over there (within sight)
weevily rice.
be mindful to give rice to our neighbors.
and went up to him again and again, saying, “hail, king of the jews!” and they slapped him in the face.
tungonu is the oldest, after him comes dusing's mother, after dusing's mother comes luluy's mother.
i was afraid of you, because you are a hard man. you take out what you did not put in and reap what you did not sow.'
payment.
to be a minister of christ jesus to the gentiles with the priestly duty of proclaiming the gospel of god, so that the gentiles might become an offering acceptable to god, sanctified by the holy spirit.
if a child sits, he also scoots forward if he cannot yet stand up.
"what did moses command you?" he replied.
do not be like cain, who belonged to the evil one and murdered his brother. and why did he murder him? because his own actions were evil and his brother's were righteous.
the son of enosh, the son of seth, the son of adam, the son of god.
for which i am suffering even to the point of being chained like a criminal. but god’s word is not chained.
to internalize
a kind of cicada.
the bark of the lawa-an tree was loosened all the way to the tip [of the tree].
the centurion heard of jesus and sent some elders of the jews to him, asking him to come and heal his servant.
shelf, contradict
the third angel poured out his bowl on the rivers and springs of water, and they became blood.
small ant
cause an illness
by calling this covenant "new," he has made the first one obsolete; and what is obsolete and aging will soon disappear.
if anyone is to go into captivity, into captivity they will go. if anyone is to be killed with the sword, with the sword they will be killed. this calls for patient endurance and faithfulness on the part of god’s people.
if someone requests salt, even a little, he doesn't have any.
bask in the sun.
different
he said this to show the kind of death he was going to die.
tropical ulcer
turning around, jesus saw them following and asked, “what do you want?” they said, “rabbi” (which means “teacher”), “where are you staying?”
to make a wheezy sound in a person’s lungs (who has pneumonia)
be merciful, just as your father is merciful.
the person whose horse was confiscated for a debt, yelled with a loud yell, "why is it that i am the one from whom you take something for a debt when i have no debt to you?"
to lick with the tongue
i warn everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: if anyone adds anything to them, god will add to him the plagues described in this book.
when the sky is clear, the clouds are just thin and the rays of the sun [shine] through.
jesus answered, “are there not twelve hours of daylight? anyone who walks in the daytime will not stumble, for they see by this world’s light.”
but you have insulted the poor. is it not the rich who are exploiting you? are they not the ones who are dragging you into court?
he who speaks on his own does so to gain honor for himself, but he who works for the honor of the one who sent him is a man of truth; there is nothing false about him.
blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy.
outsider
and the chief priests and the teachers of the law were looking for some way to get rid of jesus, for they were afraid of the people.
turkeys, geese, ducks, small geese, all have wings.
check out
i served the lord with great humility and with tears and in the midst of severe testing by the plots of my jewish opponents.
to wrap oneself (in blanket)
we (1st person plural, exclusive)
the fourth angel poured out his bowl on the sun, and the sun was allowed to scorch people with fire.
in addition to our own encouragement, we were especially delighted to see how happy titus was, because his spirit has been refreshed by all of you. i had boasted to him about you, and you have not embarrassed me. but just as everything we said to you was true, so our boasting about you to titus has proved to be true as well.
to deliberately exposed to smoke
do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.
to be edible
lower abdomen; bridge of pelvic bone
in their effort to keep us from speaking to the gentiles so that they may be saved. in this way they always heap up their sins to the limit. the wrath of god has come upon them at last.
we jump up and down when we make two or three repetitive jumps.
no one who is born of god will continue to sin, because god's seed remains in him; he cannot go on sinning, because he has been born of god.
in bringing many sons and daughters to glory, it was fitting that god, for whom and through whom everything exists, should make the pioneer of their salvation perfect through what he suffered.
sternum
to submit to such as these and to everyone who joins in the work, and labors at it.
jesus replied, "man, who appointed me a judge or an arbiter between you?"
light
privately
daddy-long-legs spider
but from now on, the son of man will be seated at the right hand of the mighty god."
carry each other's burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of christ.
how i wish i could be with you now and change my tone, because i am perplexed about you!
to feel peaceful; to have a clear conscience.
is the law, therefore, opposed to the promises of god? absolutely not! for if a law had been given that could impart life, then righteousness would certainly have come by the law.
we recovered from our fear of the raiders.
despise
will, determination
small nut from a type of rattan which is chewed with betelnut.
restrain yourself
finish doing
to envision, have a vision.
not so with you. instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,
a kind of weed with thorny leaves.
the steps there, they were extended because they were narrow at first.
pour on
who testifies to everything he saw—that is, the word of god and the testimony of jesus christ.
raider
cave under the water;
it is not surprising, then, if his servants masquerade as servants of righteousness. their end will be what their actions deserve.
“it is my judgment, therefore, that we should not make it difficult for the gentiles who are turning to god.
uncle is continually tossing and turning. he is always turning over (lit. turning his body over) because his pain is excessive.
so then he told them plainly, “lazarus is dead.”
but now that you have been set free from sin and have become slaves of god, the benefit you reap leads to holiness, and the result is eternal life.
jesus answered, “i tell you, not seven times, but seventy-seven times.
the guns  were taken as spoils.
for jesus had said to him, "come out of this man, you evil spirit!"
those who are in the realm of the flesh cannot please god.
rocks are what have been intentionally scattered over the path.
but now that you know god—or rather are known by god—how is it that you are turning back to those weak and miserable forces? do you wish to be enslaved by them all over again?
type of tree used to treat rice against bugs
for john had been saying to herod, "it is not lawful for you to have your brother's wife."
line up
already you have all you want! already you have become rich! you have begun to reign—and that without us! how i wish that you really had begun to reign so that we also might reign with you!
peter remembered and said to jesus, "rabbi, look! the fig tree you cursed has withered!"
whenever the evil spirits saw him, they fell down before him and cried out, "you are the son of god."
as jesus approached jericho, a blind man was sitting by the roadside begging.
for we do not have a high priest who is unable to empathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tempted in every way, just as we are—yet he did not sin.
white grubs
philip, like andrew and peter, was from the town of bethsaida.
become stiff, as in frozen fish
tell
on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, when it was customary to sacrifice the passover lamb, jesus' disciples asked him, "where do you want us to go and make preparations for you to eat the passover?"
as it is written: “there is no one righteous, not even one;
then jesus declared, "i am the bread of life. he who comes to me will never go hungry, and he who believes in me will never be thirsty.
brothers and sisters, let me take an example from everyday life. just as no one can set aside or add to a human covenant that has been duly established, so it is in this case.
friend
if you are praising god with your spirit, how can one who finds himself among those who do not understand say "amen" to your thanksgiving, since he does not know what you are saying?
that bread on which you spread a layer of peanut butter, that is the sandwiched peanut butter.
then the high priest asked stephen, “are these charges true?”
do not allow what you consider good to be spoken of as evil.
there is only one woman whom he loves.
they passed the first and second guards and came to the iron gate leading to the city. it opened for them by itself, and they went through it. when they had walked the length of one street, suddenly the angel left him.
lastborn child
finger ring
thousand.
but jesus, knowing their evil intent, said, “you hypocrites, why are you trying to trap me?
for the time will come when you will say, 'blessed are the barren women, the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed!'
but peter declared, “even if i have to die with you, i will never disown you.” and all the other disciples said the same.
afraid
he sent still another, and that one they killed. he sent many others; some of them they beat, others they killed.
then jesus began to denounce the towns in which most of his miracles had been performed, because they did not repent.
monthly-paid worker (housegirl, etc.)
therefore he is able to save completely those who come to god through him, because he always lives to intercede for them.
halfway point
we place the stone and bee's wax which is used to charm a person on [her] as an armband on her arm or used as a necklace.
two are riding the horse; one behind the other.
at midnight the cry rang out: ‘here’s the bridegroom! come out to meet him!’
they are darkened in their understanding and separated from the life of god because of the ignorance that is in them due to the hardening of their hearts.
start or jerk, as when feverish or nervous
protest loudly.
we’ll dig sweet potatoes to eat with the monkey later on.
penetrate
again i ask: did they stumble so as to fall beyond recovery? not at all! rather, because of their transgression, salvation has come to the gentiles to make israel envious.
all these are the work of one and the same spirit, and he gives them to each one, just as he determines.
it's difficult for us.
but the one whom god raised from the dead did not see decay.
bird
now there have been many of those priests, since death prevented them from continuing in office;
intention
above all, you must understand that no prophecy of scripture came about by the prophet's own interpretation.
that there were no needy persons among them. for from time to time those who owned land or houses sold them, brought the money from the sales
leave alone
he answered, "i have told you already and you did not listen. why do you want to hear it again? do you want to become his disciples, too?"
and i saw a mighty angel proclaiming in a loud voice, “who is worthy to break the seals and open the scroll?”
to develop infected sores
zechariah asked the angel, “how can i be sure of this? i am an old man, and my wife is well along in years.”
to pass out
the sky receded like a scroll, rolling up, and every mountain and island was removed from its place.
to be broken loose from a marriage relationship
for you can all prophesy in turn so that everyone may be instructed and encouraged.
to carry a lunch to eat later
but they were childless because elizabeth was not able to conceive, and they were both very old.
important
taboo
i know your deeds, your hard work and your perseverance. i know that you cannot tolerate wicked people, that you have tested those who claim to be apostles but are not, and have found them false.
to make a depression in dust or ashes by scratching or using an instrument
then those who were in the boat worshiped him, saying, “truly you are the son of god.”
tell us then, what is your opinion? is it right to pay the imperial tax to caesar or not?”
i was personally unknown to the churches of judea that are in christ.
while he was still speaking, a bright cloud covered them, and a voice from the cloud said, “this is my son, whom i love; with him i am well pleased. listen to him!”
he answered, "have you never read what david did when he and his companions were hungry and in need?
produce
it was necessary, then, for the copies of the heavenly things to be purified with these sacrifices, but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.
good character/patient?? in our place, if he is having great difficulty, he always supresses his feelings and doesn't quickly revenge. he is very patient.
the famine arrived.
whoever has my commands and obeys them, he is the one who loves me. he who loves me will be loved by my father, and i too will love him and show myself to him."
a step-father (or adoptive father] is not the true [i.e. biological] father.
make a fire
[when the it inches forward], the baby moves a little.
drain (canal to drain water from pool to catch fish)
fish’s tail
supernatural power
yawn
by this he meant the spirit, whom those who believed in him were later to receive. up to that time the spirit had not been given, since jesus had not yet been glorified.
excel
scissors; to cut with scissors
you say, “food for the stomach and the stomach for food, and god will destroy them both.” the body, however, is not meant for sexual immorality but for the lord, and the lord for the body.
the length between joints of plants such as bamboo, cane or rattan.
slide
but instead, one brother takes another to court—and this in front of unbelievers!
by this gospel you are saved, if you hold firmly to the word i preached to you. otherwise, you have believed in vain.
custom, manners.
light or brilliance, as from the sun, a lamp, or a flashlight
"am i a jew?" pilate replied. "it was your people and your chief priests who handed you over to me. what is it you have done?"
so that you may become blameless and pure, children of god without fault in a crooked and depraved generation, in which you shine like stars in the universe
they will make up games to comfort those whose breath is hurting.
brothers, i urge you to bear with my word of exhortation, for i have written you only a short letter.
likewise the tongue is a small part of the body, but it makes great boasts. consider what a great forest is set on fire by a small spark.
draw near
be hesitant to do something
when we have guests, when the food is served, we get it started [by saying], “friend, let’s eat now.” we are inviting [him] to come and eat (lit. that we-dual will eat).
is not the cup of thanksgiving for which we give thanks a participation in the blood of christ? and is not the bread that we break a participation in the body of christ?
we believe that jesus died and rose again and so we believe that god will bring with jesus those who have fallen asleep in him.
a toy, pet, or favored thing.
a kind of black rice.
because of the present crisis, i think that it is good for a man to remain as he is.
dish up food
fat, healthy
what i am carrying suspended is lightweight.
bamboo shelves of cupboard.
friendship name (shared by close friends)
heaviest
or do you not know that wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of god? do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral nor idolaters nor adulterers nor men who have sex with men
steps to a porch or on a hillside
incomplete
if it is rainy season for two months, the feet of the people will get a fungus infection if they don't have shoes.
‘even the dust of your town that sticks to our feet we wipe off against you. yet be sure of this: the kingdom of god has come near.’
to do.
when his wife (has been released from the charm by means of a ritual, the woman's attitude toward that man will become bad because her love had been forced when she was married [to him].
peter and his companions were very sleepy, but when they became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.
from then on, pilate tried to set jesus free, but the jewish leaders kept shouting, “if you let this man go, you are no friend of caesar. anyone who claims to be a king opposes caesar.”
you travel to magimon at a separate time from me
for i myself am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. i tell this one, ‘go,’ and he goes; and that one, ‘come,’ and he comes. i say to my servant, ‘do this,’ and he does it.”
peter answered him, “we have left everything to follow you! what then will there be for us?”
i would like to learn just one thing from you: did you receive the spirit by the works of the law, or by believing what you heard?
nudge someone with an elbow
you will be betrayed even by parents, brothers, relatives and friends, and they will put some of you to death.
when one is possessed by the spirit, she sucks raw chicken blood.
then jesus entered a house, and again a crowd gathered, so that he and his disciples were not even able to eat.
then jesus went through the towns and villages, teaching as he made his way to jerusalem.
we split open the pula palm tree which we have notched and then we see many white grubs which are squirming.
ascend.
to refrain from giving
then he left them, got back into the boat and crossed to the other side.
to be the recipients of an angry outburst
i, paul, write this greeting in my own hand, which is the distinguishing mark in all my letters. this is how i write.
lift one's legs above waist while walking
to make sluggish; to give a drugged effect
a person says, “why is this fense [here]” we will reply, “we have sectioned it off for seed
matthew, thomas, james son of alphaeus, simon who was called the zealot,
heart
it always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres.
after this i looked and in heaven the temple, that is, the tabernacle of the testimony, was opened.
one person smooths and flattens out [the leaves]. another person rolls them up.
to be uncertain, unsure of something; to be in doubt
"not long after that, the younger son got together all he had, set off for a distant country and there squandered his wealth in wild living.
when the pig has been cooked, they strip the bones which still have flesh on them.
when peter came to antioch, i opposed him to his face, because he was clearly in the wrong.
then i heard another voice from heaven say: “ ‘come out of her, my people,’ so that you will not share in her sins, so that you will not receive any of her plagues;
to cut up in pieces by directing blows at right angles to the wood; to split wood
strain with much effort
so pilate came out to them and asked, "what charges are you bringing against this man?
to squirm (like worms)
to unfold, as a letter
a kind of cicada.
"has any of the rulers or of the pharisees believed in him?
i charge you, in the sight of god and christ jesus and the elect angels, to keep these instructions without partiality, and to do nothing out of favoritism.
water dipper, drinking vessel, made from coconut shell
father
large roots of huge forest trees growing above ground
small orange flower-like balls used in rice charm
jesus answered her, “if you knew the gift of god and who it is that asks you for a drink, you would have asked him and he would have given you living water.”
a pussy, open ulcer-like sore typically with raised edges, especially of a tropical ulcer on the skin.
the earth is bumpy because it has many mountains.
hit the chicken on the head with a death blow.
tongues, then, are a sign, not for believers but for unbelievers; prophecy, however, is for believers, not for unbelievers.
on the lord’s day i was in the spirit, and i heard behind me a loud voice like a trumpet,
but whoever does not have them is nearsighted and blind, forgetting that they have been cleansed from their past sins.
unfurl, untie, translate; unravel.
go down
cross over a river or obstacle
a river tributary of the liboganon
“all this i will give you,” he said, “if you will bow down and worship me.”
if we meet someone along the trail and their child is crying and we help comfort him, that is an example of treating a child well.
how much
and the god of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory in christ, after you have suffered a little while, will himself restore you and make you strong, firm and steadfast.
large, biting black ant
edible red larvae of a beetle found in rattan
person with worms; wormy.
and i know that this man—whether in the body or apart from the body i do not know, but god knows—
maybe, perhaps
to be sure, sin was in the world before the law was given, but sin is not charged against anyone’s account where there is no law.
they spit on him, and took the staff and struck him on the head again and again.
others said, "he is the christ."
he told them this parable: "no one tears a patch from a new garment and sews it on an old one. if he does, he will have torn the new garment, and the patch from the new will not match the old.
a skirt of  thin material, is show-through when we look at it.
but what does it say? “the word is near you; it is in your mouth and in your heart,” that is, the message concerning faith that we proclaim:
all who are under the yoke of slavery should consider their masters worthy of full respect, so that god’s name and our teaching may not be slandered.
a kind of red rice.
so they took him and killed him, and threw him out of the vineyard.
as a result, people brought the sick into the streets and laid them on beds and mats so that at least peter’s shadow might fall on some of them as he passed by.
were you a slave when you were called? don’t let it trouble you—although if you can gain your freedom, do so.
to part from
old
work
he hunted for something to kick.
you yourselves are our letter, written on our hearts, known and read by everyone.
he says, “i will declare your name to my brothers and sisters; in the assembly i will sing your praises.”
throw a tantrum (monkey shaking a branch)
to deliver something all the way to its destination
a chicken which has laid eggs, sets [on its eggs] for fifteen days or sixteen days before [they] crack open.
to have chills
judas and silas, who themselves were prophets, said much to encourage and strengthen the believers.
to decompose (wood becoming soft and crumbly)
admonishing word to a coughing child
if he comes suddenly, do not let him find you sleeping.
he told the crowd to sit down on the ground.
refuse in marriage plans
the albino antabun heron has no mixture of design because it is completely white.
branch
he then added, “very truly i tell you, you will see ‘heaven open, and the angels of god ascending and descending on’ the son of man.”
peckled chicken
so i was afraid and went out and hid your gold in the ground. see, here is what belongs to you.’
old worn-out basket
don't play so much outside because you will happen to be in the path of evil spirit(s) which are en route to check out a dead person.
by faith jacob, when he was dying, blessed each of joseph's sons, and worshiped as he leaned on the top of his staff.
some of you have become arrogant, as if i were not coming to you.
have a withered hand or foot.
wood that is quick-burning always flames and then quickly burns up when used to build a fire.
and what more shall i say? i do not have time to tell about gideon, barak, samson, jephthah, david, samuel and the prophets,
i tell you this so that no one may deceive you by fine-sounding arguments.
the mystery that has been kept hidden for ages and generations, but is now disclosed to the saints. to them god has chosen to make known among the gentiles the glorious riches of this mystery, which is christ in you, the hope of glory.
flourish
likewise you also have those who hold to the teaching of the nicolaitans.
kind of blackened spear
shredded abaca fiber (hemp)
jesus answered them, “destroy this temple, and i will raise it again in three days.”
fawn all over someone
they will treat you this way because of my name, for they do not know the one who sent me.
an egg which stinks and has not yet developed and will not hatch, that has become underdeveloped and spoiled.
a mass of twisted vines
[some manuscripts include: “for an angel of the lord went down at certain seasons into the pool and stirred up the water; whoever then first, after the stirring of the water, stepped in was made well from whatever disease with which he was afflicted.”]
"what then will the owner of the vineyard do? he will come and kill those tenants and give the vineyard to others.
the tempter came to him and said, “if you are the son of god, tell these stones to become bread.”
one's gallbladder is good if there is nothing to upset him.
present a firstborn child to paternal grandparents
we hunger for fish and meat when we harvest.
to wrinkle one's forehead (when worried or angry)
extinguish
all the prophets testify about him that everyone who believes in him receives forgiveness of sins through his name.”
but avoid foolish controversies and genealogies and arguments and quarrels about the law, because these are unprofitable and useless.
prediction
their bodies were brought back to shechem and placed in the tomb that abraham had bought from the sons of hamor at shechem for a certain sum of money.
circular growth of hair
later they sent some of the pharisees and herodians to jesus to catch him in his words.
to escort someone
weight
kind of banana, long and green
when it was daylight, the magistrates sent their officers to the jailer with the order: "release those men."
such people should realize that what we are in our letters when we are absent, we will be in our actions when we are present.
all who are under the yoke of slavery should consider their masters worthy of full respect, so that god’s name and our teaching may not be slandered.
the kabal hangs back-side down when it walks and is exceedingly slow to move.
when a boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
“you are a child of the devil and an enemy of everything that is right! you are full of all kinds of deceit and trickery. will you never stop perverting the right ways of the lord?
light laughter.
five times i received from the jews the forty lashes minus one.
you may be giving thanks well enough, but the other man is not edified.
a rocky place.
as for a person who is stepping down to the ground from his house, if he happens to be doing that at the same time a dove calls, he/she will not go ahead with climbing down to the ground.
so he who was seated on the cloud swung his sickle over the earth, and the earth was harvested.
dam up water
“be quiet!” jesus said sternly. “come out of him!” then the demon threw the man down before them all and came out without injuring him.
if an omen dove calls from both our left and right simultaneously, we must stay home. that is the labak omen.
this happened three times, and immediately the sheet was taken back to heaven.
even so, when you see all these things, you know that it is near, right at the door.
or is god the god of jews only? is he not the god of gentiles too? yes, of gentiles too,
call me.
“again, you have heard that it was said to the people long ago, ‘do not break your oath, but fulfill to the lord the vows you have made.’
"does our law condemn anyone without first hearing him to find out what he is doing?"
that everyone who believes may have eternal life in him.”
camote (kapugi, pipisan, talaingod, tigwa)
do not neglect your gift, which was given you through prophecy when the body of elders laid their hands on you.
these things are being taken figuratively: the women represent two covenants. one covenant is from mount sinai and bears children who are to be slaves: this is hagar.
the world
we were drawn away to something else so that we were not able to accomplish
branch
intentionally spread
‘look, you scoffers, wonder and perish, for i am going to do something in your days that you would never believe, even if someone told you.’”
any bird of prey including hawks/eagles and nocturnal owls
guarantee
guardian
he also saw a poor widow put in two very small copper coins.
and saying, "it is true! the lord has risen and has appeared to simon."
but if you are led by the spirit, you are not under law.
forgive
lovesick
about noon the following day as they were on their journey and approaching the city, peter went up on the roof to pray.
but each one is tempted when, by his own evil desire, he is dragged away and enticed.
bathing place
medicinal plant used to treat skin diseases
so if the whole church comes together and everyone speaks in tongues, and some who do not understand or some unbelievers come in, will they not say that you are out of your mind?
oh, how strong was this crocodile
“the man runs away because he is a hired hand and cares nothing for the sheep.”
but if it is by the spirit of god that i drive out demons, then the kingdom of god has come upon you.
“don’t you believe that i am in the father, and that the father is in me? the words i say to you i do not speak on my own authority. rather, it is the father, living in me, who is doing his work.”
the steps there, they were extended because they were narrow at first.
cats were changed into manggoose.
mildew
but the chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowd to ask for barabbas and to have jesus executed.
to inadvertently exposed to smoke
as jesus was sitting on the mount of olives opposite the temple, peter, james, john and andrew asked him privately,
the sixth angel poured out his bowl on the great river euphrates, and its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings from the east.
the edge of the river which is flat in which reeds grow, that is soft soil ground.
will you put this on board?
he looked up and said, "i see people; they look like trees walking around."
to move about (as unborn piglets)
sea serpent or eel
for i wrote you out of great distress and anguish of heart and with many tears, not to grieve you but to let you know the depth of my love for you.
“i am one who testifies for myself; my other witness is the father, who sent me.”
jiggle
yet it was good of you to share in my troubles.
the piglets take turns moving around
(both jews and converts to judaism); cretans and arabs—we hear them declaring the wonders of god in our own tongues!”
regarding if we have a friend with whom we had a good relationship (lit. our accompanying was good) but then if someone sings his song about god but he is no longer here on the earth, loneliness/grief will be triggered in you when you hear that song [which he sang] when he was still alive.
to seize something
no one will scold you because i have made the decision.
he makes provision to feed the cat.
there was a day when i was attacked by two wasps which suddenly stung me.
for whoever does the will of my father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.”
follow god’s example, therefore, as dearly loved children
offspring of edible bakbak frog
“all who have come before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep have not listened to them.”
your intention is bad.
wild boar; wild creature
“the virgin will conceive and give birth to a son, and they will call him immanuel” (which means “god with us”).
iguana
roast in fire
groove in skin
when they found him on the other side of the lake, they asked him, "rabbi, when did you get here?"
endure hardship as discipline; god is treating you as his children. for what children are not disciplined by their father?
handle
clearing; atmosphere near the earth
a spring
for i tell you, i will not eat it again until it finds fulfillment in the kingdom of god."
they will dash you to the ground, you and the children within your walls. they will not leave one stone on another, because you did not recognize the time of god's coming to you."
i came to you in weakness with great fear and trembling.
then they spit in his face and struck him with their fists. others slapped him
a person's circumstance
when the pharisees saw this, they said to him, “look! your disciples are doing what is unlawful on the sabbath.”
jesus answered, “how can the guests of the bridegroom mourn while he is with them? the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; then they will fast.
now i want you to realize that the head of every man is christ, and the head of the woman is man, and the head of christ is god.
later, later on; but then; to turn out differently than expected.
the horse trampled his wife.
when he arrived at the house of jairus, he did not let anyone go in with him except peter, john and james, and the child’s father and mother.
evil spirit
scornful term of address for a woman.
give all
eversince
in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.
at midnight the cry rang out: ‘here’s the bridegroom! come out to meet him!’
heap of tobacco
fluff up
the mixture is buried in the ground for two days before finding it to have become the agkud delicacy.
i found he had done nothing deserving of death, but because he made his appeal to the emperor i decided to send him to rome.
when jesus had finished these parables, he moved on from there.
as for a dibble stick, it become flattened as it is used for planting and so we sharpen it again.
mixed fur (black, grey, white); striped grey cat fur
cheaper.
moth ball
menstruate
a woman in that town who lived a sinful life learned that jesus was eating at the pharisee’s house, so she came there with an alabaster jar of perfume.
to locate, or go to a specific place for a specific purpose.
to be stained, as a shirt
what causes fights and quarrels among you? don't they come from your desires that battle within you?
if someone wants to get married, he will pursue it relentlessly. he will keep on discussing it with the father until he says yes.
you see, at just the right time, when we were still powerless, christ died for the ungodly.
four (counting)
for he knew who was going to betray him, and that was why he said not everyone was clean.
brave; courageous
cover
but whoever hates his brother is in the darkness and walks around in the darkness; he does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded him.
keep yourselves in god's love as you wait for the mercy of our lord jesus christ to bring you to eternal life.
but paul said to the officers: "they beat us publicly without a trial, even though we are roman citizens, and threw us into prison. and now do they want to get rid of us quietly? no! let them come themselves and escort us out."
it's ripening is lacking; it’s not yet filled in.
but i want you to know that the son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins.” so he said to the paralyzed man, “get up, take your mat and go home.”
to make a crunchy sound (as when chewing crisp crackers)
evening, around 5 p.m.
the fruit of the lansones which are thick are clustered together.
i was at a loss how to investigate such matters; so i asked if he would be willing to go to jerusalem and stand trial there on these charges.
a kind of reed
the word mako-on means that what is eaten is plentiful here at nasuli and there is no famine.
so they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
important due to status or education
trick
he who does what is sinful is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the beginning. the reason the son of god appeared was to destroy the devil's work.
simon peter and another disciple were following jesus. because this disciple was known to the high priest, he went with jesus into the high priest’s courtyard,
he will bring back many of the people of israel to the lord their god.
so then, the law is holy, and the commandment is holy, righteous and good.
jesus answered, “i told you that i am he. if you are looking for me, then let these men go.”
jesus said to her, “mary.” she turned toward him and cried out in aramaic, “rabboni!” (which means “teacher”).
to cheep.
when he opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
name of a creek between togop and banualoy which flows into the liboganon.
the spirit shrieked, convulsed him violently and came out. the boy looked so much like a corpse that many said, "he's dead."
i showed him a portion of secondary forest which to cut.
feel rushed
pour out the corn which you will dry.
do not cause anyone to stumble, whether jews, greeks or the church of god--
to keep looking down carefully; watch
then one of the elders asked me, “these in white robes—who are they, and where did they come from?”
they followed him because he had amazed them for a long time with his sorcery.
festus answered, “paul is being held at caesarea, and i myself am going there soon.
refuge
this will be a sign to you: you will find a baby wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger.”
need
the people living in that place feel unsafe; all of them will pack up and move at the same time because something is making [them] afraid.
when in labor, the mother strains with much effort.
then paul called one of the centurions and said, "take this young man to the commander; he has something to tell him."
then go quickly and tell his disciples: ‘he has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into galilee. there you will see him.’ now i have told you.”
“no one takes it from me, but i lay it down of my own accord. i have authority to lay it down and authority to take it up again. this command i received from my father.”
sprinkle
become dirty or contaminated
regarding his son, who as to his earthly life was a descendant of david,
the seed that fell among thorns stands for those who hear, but as they go on their way they are choked by life’s worries, riches and pleasures, and they do not mature.
dialectal variation of gakap
to be disappointed
the water [dried up??] and went underground??.
when his wife (has been released from the charm by means of a ritual, the woman's attitude toward that man will become bad because her love had been forced when she was married [to him].
a mother hen, when it is afternoon, gathers her offspring under her wings.
and he said, "these are they who have come out of the great tribulation; they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the lamb. therefore, "they are before the throne of god and serve him day and night in his temple; and he who sits on the throne will spread his tent over them.
while pilate was sitting on the judge’s seat, his wife sent him this message: “don’t have anything to do with that innocent man, for i have suffered a great deal today in a dream because of him.”
seed set aside for planting
from him the whole body, joined and held together by every supporting ligament, grows and builds itself up in love, as each part does its work.
but jesus went to the mount of olives.
understand, then, that those who have faith are children of abraham.
nor does his word dwell in you, for you do not believe the one he sent.
this will be my third visit to you. "every matter must be established by the testimony of two or three witnesses."
if we have a leader who is traveling, there are six bodyguards.
his fellow servant fell to his knees and begged him, ‘be patient with me, and i will pay it back.’
old man; joker
jesus, full of the holy spirit, left the jordan and was led by the spirit into the wilderness,
the person does not pay attention to his own purpose.
to finish
let us hold unswervingly to the hope we profess, for he who promised is faithful.
when he rose from prayer and went back to the disciples, he found them asleep, exhausted from sorrow.
i planted the seed, apollos watered it, but god has been making it grow.
and again, isaiah says, "the root of jesse will spring up, one who will arise to rule over the nations; the gentiles will hope in him."
the chief priests and the teachers of the law heard this and began looking for a way to kill him, for they feared him, because the whole crowd was amazed at his teaching.
large seed
however
in their effort to keep us from speaking to the gentiles so that they may be saved. in this way they always heap up their sins to the limit. the wrath of god has come upon them at last.
sometimes the material which is waved is placed over the shoulder when dancing or the two pieces of material or the ends held at the waist.
to judge everyone, and to convict all the ungodly of all the ungodly acts they have done in the ungodly way, and of all the harsh words ungodly sinners have spoken against him."
paul, a servant of christ jesus, called to be an apostle and set apart for the gospel of god—
but you will receive power when the holy spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in jerusalem, and in all judea and samaria, and to the ends of the earth.”
for i did not speak of my own accord, but the father who sent me commanded me what to say and how to say it.
sun
he saw at the water’s edge two boats, left there by the fishermen, who were washing their nets.
when they had all had enough to eat, he said to his disciples, "gather the pieces that are left over. let nothing be wasted."
but now i am writing you that you must not associate with anyone who calls himself a brother but is sexually immoral or greedy, an idolater or a slanderer, a drunkard or a swindler. with such a man do not even eat
the spiritual did not come first, but the natural, and after that the spiritual.
leafy plant
for in christ all the fullness of the deity lives in bodily form,
do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit. rather, in humility value others above yourselves,
there is that which is good to envy, if what our companion is doing is good, that is what we will emulate.
grace and peace to you from god our father and the lord jesus christ.
wait or delay
we want each of you to show this same diligence to the very end, in order to make your hope sure.
hurry up.
if a woman says, “i will have been made pregnant,” it means, “someone has sinned against me.”
replace
when judas, who had betrayed him, saw that jesus was condemned, he was seized with remorse and returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and the elders.
stay
pencil sharpener.
“leave her alone,” jesus replied. “it was intended that she should save this perfume for the day of my burial.”
black iridescent chicken
she’s choking on the water.
so they signaled their partners in the other boat to come and help them, and they came and filled both boats so full that they began to sink.
don’t clink the glasses together.
and receive from him anything we ask, because we obey his commands and do what pleases him.
motivate
the child who is mute, from the time he is born until he is old already he/sh is mute and will be unable to speak.
while jesus was still talking to the crowd, his mother and brothers stood outside, wanting to speak to him.
whirlpool
then judas iscariot, one of the twelve, went to the chief priests to betray jesus to them.
we will warm ourselves by a fire if we are chilled.
after paul had seen the vision, we got ready at once to leave for macedonia, concluding that god had called us to preach the gospel to them.
so they gathered them and filled twelve baskets with the pieces of the five barley loaves left over by those who had eaten.
don’t
name of a village named after a stream.
again jesus called the crowd to him and said, "listen to me, everyone, and understand this.
destroy
bump one’s head
but mark this: there will be terrible times in the last days.
was the field burned completely
wherever the first wound was, that is where one will repeat the action of spearing.
come up close behind another person.
so he reasoned in the synagogue with both jews and god-fearing greeks, as well as in the marketplace day by day with those who happened to be there.
to get wet.
poke
dagger
philip and bartholomew; thomas and matthew the tax collector; james son of alphaeus, and thaddaeus;
children, don’t peek at the one giving birth because you will get cataracts if you look at the afterbirth, and you will be cursed. when you grow up, you won’t be able to see.
he went into all the country around the jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
large bamboo slat container for carrying grain
are you greater than our father abraham? he died, and so did the prophets. who do you think you are?"
speaking nonsense
meeting of men only.
i needed clothes and you clothed me, i was sick and you looked after me, i was in prison and you came to visit me.’
they romp with their owners.
part of certain traps released by the trigger.
we bite into and chew off corn, mangos, pangi fruit, papaya and pineapple.
for when we came into macedonia, we had no rest, but we were harassed at every turn—conflicts on the outside, fears within.
as soon as the chief priests and their officials saw him, they shouted, “crucify! crucify!” but pilate answered, “you take him and crucify him. as for me, i find no basis for a charge against him.”
we will be able to fil upl [our baskets] when harvesting.
the armed band(s) in the past were bad because they killed [people] who had no fault. but the bands of armed warrior(s) today have become groups of good warriors because they now help the soldiers.
when they kept on questioning him, he straightened up and said to them, “let any one of you who is without sin be the first to throw a stone at her.”
how often
the man answered, "now that is remarkable! you don't know where he comes from, yet he opened my eyes.
the owner’s servants came to him and said, ‘sir, didn’t you sow good seed in your field? where then did the weeds come from?’
a few days later, when jesus again entered capernaum, the people heard that he had come home.
"lord," martha said to jesus, "if you had been here, my brother would not have died.
kind of red rice
but now, by dying to what once bound us, we have been released from the law so that we serve in the new way of the spirit, and not in the old way of the written code.
the whole city was aroused, and the people came running from all directions. seizing paul, they dragged him from the temple, and immediately the gates were shut.
do not entertain an accusation against an elder unless it is brought by two or three witnesses.
was caught up to paradise and heard inexpressible things, things that no one is permitted to tell.
and he will go on before the lord, in the spirit and power of elijah, to turn the hearts of the parents to their children and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous—to make ready a people prepared for the lord.”
we scrape out the seeds of the ripe papaya.
but even if you should suffer for what is right, you are blessed. "do not fear what they fear ; do not be frightened."
the last enemy to be destroyed is death.
jesus answered him, "i tell you the truth, today you will be with me in paradise."
they call the spouse of his/her sibling iras.
"when i returned to jerusalem and was praying at the temple, i fell into a trance
“but now i am going to him who sent me. none of you asks me, ‘where are you going?’”
he is always turning over because his pain is excessive.
straighten, as one's back
he had james, the brother of john, put to death with the sword.
so when you, a mere human being, pass judgment on them and yet do the same things, do you think you will escape god’s judgment?
name of a location with a deep whirlpool and cave.
tree uprooted by landslide, flood, or wind
to become flavorful
again, if the trumpet does not sound a clear call, who will get ready for battle?
for in this hope we were saved. but hope that is seen is no hope at all. who hopes for what they already have?
flood
lost
itchy toe
those who are in the realm of the flesh cannot please god.
reversed
very strong; sturdy
now the overseer is to be above reproach, faithful to his wife, temperate, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, able to teach,
so pilate asked jesus, "are you the king of the jews?" "yes, it is as you say," jesus replied.
if [someone] marries the [widowed] mother, that man is the stepfather of her children.
there is danger not only that our trade will lose its good name, but also that the temple of the great goddess artemis will be discredited, and the goddess herself, who is worshiped throughout the province of asia and the world, will be robbed of her divine majesty."
after arresting him, he put him in prison, handing him over to be guarded by four squads of four soldiers each. herod intended to bring him out for public trial after the passover.
even so, when you see these things happening, you know that the kingdom of god is near.
the cat tipped over the sugar.
a woman in that town who lived a sinful life learned that jesus was eating at the pharisee’s house, so she came there with an alabaster jar of perfume.
loosely woven, not close together
he regarded disgrace for the sake of christ as of greater value than the treasures of egypt, because he was looking ahead to his reward.
to know how
when we dry corn in the sun, it will shrink because it is green.
what did he accomplish
the second angel sounded his trumpet, and something like a huge mountain, all ablaze, was thrown into the sea. a third of the sea turned into blood,
all domesticated animals have hips but as for chickens, they don't because their lets are on their sides.
speech that hits the mark. it boomerangs. people cannot answer back.
hang up by rope or string
peel camotes or vegetables
thread
fit
i’ll return in the future, about two years from now.
i baptize you with water, but he will baptize you with the holy spirit."
which
flap wings or flutter, as a bound chicken
now we ask you, brothers and sisters, to acknowledge those who work hard among you, who care for you in the lord and who admonish you.
the child’s choking on the milk.
by faith abel offered god a better sacrifice than cain did. by faith he was commended as a righteous man, when god spoke well of his offerings. and by faith he still speaks, even though he is dead.
brothers, if someone is caught in a sin, you who are spiritual should restore him gently. but watch yourself, or you also may be tempted.
a kind of short cooking banana.
the spirit told philip, “go to that chariot and stay near it.”
i wrote as i did, so that when i came i would not be distressed by those who should have made me rejoice. i had confidence in all of you, that you would all share my joy.
through glory and dishonor, bad report and good report; genuine, yet regarded as impostors;
very truly i tell you, we speak of what we know, and we testify to what we have seen, but still you people do not accept our testimony.
meet from
we build a fire there in the middle of the cornfield and put the fruit of the hot peppers into the fire.
what i mean is this: one of you says, "i follow paul"; another, "i follow apollos"; another, "i follow cephas "; still another, "i follow christ."
"i tell you the truth, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
engulfed in a problem (quarrel turns into war)
now the berean jews were of more noble character than those in thessalonica, for they received the message with great eagerness and examined the scriptures every day to see if what paul said was true.
strand
the person who worked at a another location, he received a message from his wife by cell phone [saying], “carry through to return home to kapalong next week.
dumb
for if men do these things when the tree is green, what will happen when it is dry?"
bowl made of coconut shell.
his eyes are like blazing fire, and on his head are many crowns. he has a name written on him that no one knows but he himself.
the very top of the head
for i have come down from heaven not to do my will but to do the will of him who sent me.
a bala-an is a small bamboo container in which edible water creatures are put.
the child repeatedly topples as it takes steps as it approaches its mother.
so was fulfilled what was spoken through the prophet: “i will open my mouth in parables, i will utter things hidden since the creation of the world.”
speak louder so that the others can hear well.
"you believe at last!" jesus answered.
now i am ready to visit you for the third time, and i will not be a burden to you, because what i want is not your possessions but you. after all, children should not have to save up for their parents, but parents for their children.
abstain from work or music due to mourning
(for that righteous man, living among them day after day, was tormented in his righteous soul by the lawless deeds he saw and heard)--
an american.
again, it will be like a man going on a journey, who called his servants and entrusted his wealth to them.
and that is just what i did in jerusalem. on the authority of the chief priests, i put many of the lord’s people in prison, and when they were put to death, i cast my vote against them.
not
mustache
we’ll be swept away by a wave of the liboganon.
kind of large forest tree with large leaves.
weave walls of bamboo.
rather, we have renounced secret and shameful ways; we do not use deception, nor do we distort the word of god. on the contrary, by setting forth the truth plainly we commend ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of god.
a type of tree
cutting loose the anchors, they left them in the sea and at the same time untied the ropes that held the rudders. then they hoisted the foresail to the wind and made for the beach.
a necklace; a bead.
follow a scent
the fin by the fish's ear is what determines the movement of the body of that fish.
i was too big for it.
we sing a lulluby to the child
if we eat something that still has a bone, we bite into and chew [the flesh] off until it is stripped
my message and my preaching were not with wise and persuasive words, but with a demonstration of the spirit’s power,
so christ also did not take upon himself the glory of becoming a high priest. but god said to him, "you are my son; today i have become your father. "
what shall we do now?
edible beach plant
one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and said to me, “come, i will show you the punishment of the great prostitute, who sits by many waters.
but the worries of this life, the deceitfulness of wealth and the desires for other things come in and choke the word, making it unfruitful.
god is the one who has the greatest power.
a second or third wife; polygamy
the water is bubbling.
leave alone
a man with leprosy came to him and begged him on his knees, "if you are willing, you can make me clean."
to wrap something around something else, as a bandage
then they called them in again and commanded them not to speak or teach at all in the name of jesus.
after spending some time in antioch, paul set out from there and traveled from place to place throughout the region of galatia and phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.
uncle made a mortar which was small but the mouth was spacious and deep.
there was a person who smoothed off his lumber with which he was making a house.
each
small pool on a beach
you see that his faith and his actions were working together, and his faith was made complete by what he did.
the elders who are leaders are the ones who have the responsibility for the various areas.
pus
this can refer to the supreme god or be used of beings which are believed to be gods.
get out every last bit of food, or anything, from a container or bag.
our agreement in advance was that whoever has stamina to come along, he/she will be chosen.
so i sent for you immediately, and it was good of you to come. now we are all here in the presence of god to listen to everything the lord has commanded you to tell us.”
kunsay, cut the mat material into strips for me first i’ll weave.
but i was lowered in a basket from a window in the wall and slipped through his hands.
hide
do you think i cannot call on my father, and he will at once put at my disposal more than twelve legions of angels?
when everything had been arranged like this, the priests entered regularly into the outer room to carry on their ministry.
long-sleeved
and he left them and went out of the city to bethany, where he spent the night.
large bamboo slat container for carrying grain
strong improbability
kick
close, as a flower in the afternoon
but some of them went to the pharisees and told them what jesus had done.
a white heron
you have no part or share in this ministry, because your heart is not right before god.
you have not come to a mountain that can be touched and that is burning with fire; to darkness, gloom and storm;
relate
jesus answered, “everyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again,
jump
stop bleeding
even with these words, they had difficulty keeping the crowd from sacrificing to them.
multiple cloud heads forming
the world cannot hate you, but it hates me because i testify that its works are evil.
slide
but these days, cassava is now being used to make agkud.
if there is a child who is always crying, that is a sign that raiders will arrive.
a strong wind was blowing and the waters grew rough.
and if any place will not welcome you or listen to you, shake the dust off your feet when you leave, as a testimony against them."
a whole clump of bamboo was cracked when a dead tree fell on top of it.
i saw the notebook which was here on top of the table.
we just suck on candy so that it will be slow to dissolve.
if we experience swelling that has not yet burst, our lymph nodes in the groin will hurt.
but other jews were jealous; so they rounded up some bad characters from the marketplace, formed a mob and started a riot in the city. they rushed to jason’s house in search of paul and silas in order to bring them out to the crowd.
you, however, know all about my teaching, my way of life, my purpose, faith, patience, love, endurance,
brothers, i do not consider myself yet to have taken hold of it. but one thing i do: forgetting what is behind and straining toward what is ahead,
and everyone who calls on the name of the lord will be saved.’
"stop grumbling among yourselves," jesus answered.
a kind of wood
then one of them, named caiaphas, who was high priest that year, spoke up, "you know nothing at all!
"what is truth?" pilate asked. with this he went out again to the jews and said, "i find no basis for a charge against him.
the stars will fall from the sky, and the heavenly bodies will be shaken.'
interim
we worship god.
i am here beside you; i am here.
“the virgin will conceive and give birth to a son, and they will call him immanuel” (which means “god with us”).
parent of a child's spouse
middle of night, or zenith of moon
to produce shoots (as young rice).
to be brought back to life
clamshell, clam.
camotes are used for bait
we test the water by touching it with our finger [to see] whether the warmth is just right.
are they not the ones who are slandering the noble name of him to whom you belong?
bite
asa the father of jehoshaphat, jehoshaphat the father of jehoram, jehoram the father of uzziah,
jesus replied, “they do not need to go away. you give them something to eat.”
but in keeping with his promise we are looking forward to a new heaven and a new earth, the home of righteousness.
slice
but now that you have been set free from sin and have become slaves of god, the benefit you reap leads to holiness, and the result is eternal life.
go ahead of
we need to do our work diligently like a slave. we [shouldn't] swerve from our work.
"or suppose a woman has ten silver coins and loses one. does she not light a lamp, sweep the house and search carefully until she finds it?
when the lamb opened the second seal, i heard the second living creature say, “come!”
but they shouted, “take him away! take him away! crucify him!” “shall i crucify your king?” pilate asked. “we have no king but caesar,” the chief priests answered.
there was a person who had been murdered who se body was found sprawled out on the ground as he was lying there dead.
when we heat water, we set it aside because we will allow the water to cool off.
to cause disaster
as for the liboganon river, the cane there in the flat area is thick and its body is hard.
name of a river and/or the village on this river which is just south of maambago.
to have to continue on the way without stopping overnight, to finish field work in one day
then paul and barnabas answered them boldly: “we had to speak the word of god to you first. since you reject it and do not consider yourselves worthy of eternal life, we now turn to the gentiles.
there in front of him was a man suffering from dropsy.
since
and said, "if you, even you, had only known on this day what would bring you peace--but now it is hidden from your eyes.
start eating (because food is ready)
beggar
see to it that no one misses the grace of god and that no bitter root grows up to cause trouble and defile many.
the person who has finished harvesting, he removes the old plants as he weeds.
my companions saw the light, but they did not understand the voice of him who was speaking to me.
pound rice with someone
he who has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says to the churches.
here i am! i stand at the door and knock. if anyone hears my voice and opens the door, i will come in and eat with him, and he with me.
poor
when someone holes-up, we stay there in the mountains. we take refuge when there are raiders.
therefore keep watch, because you do not know the day or the hour.
i sent for him.
after spending some time in antioch, paul set out from there and traveled from place to place throughout the region of galatia and phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.
so paul stayed in corinth for a year and a half, teaching them the word of god.
leader of evil spirits
peter said to jesus, “lord, it is good for us to be here. if you wish, i will put up three shelters—one for you, one for moses and one for elijah.”
keep as a pet or domesticated animal
a person whose eye gets something in it cannot open his eye.
in a flash, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. for the trumpet will sound, the dead will be raised imperishable, and we will be changed.
when we place something over the fire, we expose it to the heat of the fire so that it can be used for wrapping food.
fathers, do not embitter your children, or they will become discouraged.
red-skinned camote with white flesh.
a second time they summoned the man who had been blind. "give glory to god, " they said. "we know this man is a sinner."
one day as he was teaching the people in the temple courts and preaching the gospel, the chief priests and the teachers of the law, together with the elders, came up to him.
come
then the whole town went out to meet jesus. and when they saw him, they pleaded with him to leave their region.
flour, if it doesn't pass through a sieve, it will become lumpy.
oh, the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of god! how unsearchable his judgments, and his paths beyond tracing out!
barnabas they called zeus, and paul they called hermes because he was the chief speaker.
the words of the prophets are in agreement with this, as it is written:
the child is nursing.
make them just alike.
shield
we, however, will not boast beyond proper limits, but will confine our boasting to the sphere of service god himself has assigned to us, a sphere that also includes you.
after festus had conferred with his council, he declared: "you have appealed to caesar. to caesar you will go!"
if you have nothing for which to scold your companion, our companionship is harmonious. we don’t have any problems [between us].
the child took three steps.
now stephen, a man full of god’s grace and power, performed great wonders and signs among the people.
weeds
whoever has my commands and obeys them, he is the one who loves me. he who loves me will be loved by my father, and i too will love him and show myself to him."
the palm, that is what has the lines
after the crowd had been put outside, he went in and took the girl by the hand, and she got up.
"teacher," he declared, "all these i have kept since i was a boy."
spouse of one's ipag or boyow if that person is not one's own sibling
one says, “usi, let's wrestle.” the other says, “yes, let’s wrestle,” and so then they wrestle with each other.
wander
our life is short.
you have persevered and have endured hardships for my name, and have not grown weary.
“i am the good shepherd. the good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.”
the horses and riders i saw in my vision looked like this: their breastplates were fiery red, dark blue, and yellow as sulfur. the heads of the horses resembled the heads of lions, and out of their mouths came fire, smoke and sulfur.
if, when
if there are those who are bathing and are always floating downstream, that is drifting together with the current.
"i have come to bring fire on the earth, and how i wish it were already kindled!
avoid
i fear for you, that somehow i have wasted my efforts on you.
the rest were killed with the sword coming out of the mouth of the rider on the horse, and all the birds gorged themselves on their flesh.
but he denied it before them all. “i don’t know what you’re talking about,” he said.
tree uprooted by landslide, flood, or wind
to become dismantled or come apart
tychicus will tell you all the news about me. he is a dear brother, a faithful minister and fellow servant in the lord.
“two men went up to the temple to pray, one a pharisee and the other a tax collector.
tackle
i tell you, no! but unless you repent, you too will all perish."
although they claimed to be wise, they became fools
first, they pound the tabacco with a small piece of wood. when it has become smooth, they transfer it to a small mortar and then they pound it there with a pestle.
cataracts
with a loud cry, jesus breathed his last.
i am not writing this to shame you, but to warn you, as my dear children.
faint
engagement feast
make a mistake.
as jesus was getting into the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed begged to go with him.
morning
a kind of basket (liang) woven by strands of two.
the reason why that tree is called dayuan is because the birds flock to it to pluck the baliti fruit.
deliverately sway
as for that [word] anxious, one feels especially not peaceful.
“i am telling you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe that i am who i am.”
shake out the rice.
“caesar’s,” they replied. then he said to them, “so give back to caesar what is caesar’s, and to god what is god’s.”
avoid every kind of evil.
tiptoe.
we split open the pula palm tree which we have notched and then we see many white grubs which are wiggling about.
the person, he is repeatedly carrying wood on his shoulders to use to for building a fire.
wood-stem, glossy-leafed plant.
i know you are abraham's descendants. yet you are ready to kill me, because you have no room for my word.
small honey bee that makes its nest in a hole in a tree
for what is our hope, our joy, or the crown in which we will glory in the presence of our lord jesus when he comes? is it not you?
lose something by misplacing it
who is going to harm you if you are eager to do good?
there was a person whose clothing was torn and so he patched it by sewing on [a piece of] material.
the person got some rice and added canned fish to it to feed the cat.
now may our god and father himself and our lord jesus clear the way for us to come to you.
he said, “go away. the girl is not dead but asleep.” but they laughed at him.
and if your foot causes you to sin, cut it off. it is better for you to enter life crippled than to have two feet and be thrown into hell. where " 'their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.'
bear in mind that our lord's patience means salvation, just as our dear brother paul also wrote you with the wisdom that god gave him.
if there is a child who was born outside the village who is [deliberately] left behind by the mother, it has been abandoned by her.
stop
and jesus grew in wisdom and stature, and in favor with god and man.
instead, they were longing for a better country--a heavenly one. therefore god is not ashamed to be called their god, for he has prepared a city for them.
for the secret power of lawlessness is already at work; but the one who now holds it back will continue to do so till he is taken out of the way.
or the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many basketfuls you gathered?
privately
to say whew when out of breath
the alag nut is astringent when we chew it.
two people will race [each other] to return home.
a deep scar or depression in the flesh left from a former wound.
exalted to the right hand of god, he has received from the father the promised holy spirit and has poured out what you now see and hear.
when you enter a house, first say, ‘peace to this house.’
to go hunting with a gun or other weapon
this person is just being argumentative whose argument is not correct.
for the creation waits in eager expectation for the children of god to be revealed.
i told you that you would die in your sins; if you do not believe that i am the one i claim to be, you will indeed die in your sins."
the one who sent me is with me; he has not left me alone, for i always do what pleases him."
pull the blouse on over my head.
to be crazy, demented
a black shrimp.
if rattan is used to sstring (lit. attach by sticking [with a needle]) the beads, it will easily (lit. quickly) break if it gets wet with water.
when a person becomes old, they become shriveled because they become bent over and feeble.
you will soak yourself in the water if your body is hot.
if there are many birds of the same variety which are attracted/gathered, we call that pet [bird] a lure which is able to attract its companion.
some time later, jesus went up to jerusalem for one of the jewish festivals.
when we plant yearly fields, we go to see how the corn fields are.
but when they did not find them, they dragged jason and some other believers before the city officials, shouting: “these men who have caused trouble all over the world have now come here,
to strangle
vagina
after him, judas the galilean appeared in the days of the census and led a band of people in revolt. he too was killed, and all his followers were scattered.
but the pharisees went out and plotted how they might kill jesus.
to break the neck
kapok is burned on my arm.
pinch (with or without fingernails)
no matter what i said, [she] wouldn't agree to stay with her other daughter.
short arm shield
to bulge and crack the soil as by sweet potatoes near the surface of the ground
pressure
neither do we go beyond our limits by boasting of work done by others. our hope is that, as your faith continues to grow, our sphere of activity among you will greatly expand,
black and red ata blouse
to have plenty to eat
his winnowing fork is in his hand to clear his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his barn, but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed. and a sword will pierce your own soul too.”
remember that at that time you were separate from christ, excluded from citizenship in israel and foreigners to the covenants of the promise, without hope and without god in the world.
"i tell you the truth, if anyone says to this mountain, 'go, throw yourself into the sea,' and does not doubt in his heart but believes that what he says will happen, it will be done for him.
so the twelve gathered all the disciples together and said, “it would not be right for us to neglect the ministry of the word of god in order to wait on tables.
we’ll have tungonu go downriver in our place.
for god so loved the world that he gave his one and only son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life.
untied
they promise them freedom, while they themselves are slaves of depravity- -for a man is a slave to whatever has mastered him.
through him you believe in god, who raised him from the dead and glorified him, and so your faith and hope are in god.
the god of abraham, isaac and jacob, the god of our fathers, has glorified his servant jesus. you handed him over to be killed, and you disowned him before pilate, though he had decided to let him go.
some were convinced by what he said, but others would not believe.
"where do you want us to prepare for it?" they asked.
but first he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
sacroiliac
jesus replied, "the hour has come for the son of man to be glorified.
snort
different
whenever he goes downriver, he does not stop en route until he returns home coming from patil.
he was in the assembly in the wilderness, with the angel who spoke to him on mount sinai, and with our ancestors; and he received living words to pass on to us.
some pharisees who were with him heard him say this and asked, "what? are we blind too?"
the woman who is outgoing is good because she isn't shy; she quickly shows hospitality when there are guests.
they want to be teachers of the law, but they do not know what they are talking about or what they so confidently affirm.
when there are many grubs which are making a whispering noise, it lets us know that the [grubs] in the palm trunk have broken through [to each other] knotched palm.
the high priest carries the blood of animals into the most holy place as a sin offering, but the bodies are burned outside the camp.
don’t we have the right to take a believing wife along with us, as do the other apostles and the lord’s brothers and cephas?
just as bad
but they seized him, beat him and sent him away empty-handed.
roof poles
and asked him for letters to the synagogues in damascus, so that if he found any there who belonged to the way, whether men or women, he might take them as prisoners to jerusalem.
uncooked, insufficiently cooked
but this has all taken place that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled.” then all the disciples deserted him and fled.
our forefathers ate the manna in the desert; as it is written: 'he gave them bread from heaven to eat.' "
bamboo zither (musical instrument)
though they found no proper ground for a death sentence, they asked pilate to have him executed.
after the discussion, the wedding is begun. that is the decision that they get married.
but the word of god continued to spread and flourish.
and this is love: that we walk in obedience to his commands. as you have heard from the beginning, his command is that you walk in love.
again and again they struck him on the head with a staff and spit on him. falling on their knees, they paid homage to him.
steal.
to wind, as a vine
strength
i remember that which my father taught me about the work of sawing wood to make a house.
when we finish off the last bits of food from a pot, we scrape the crust of the rice from the pot.
every man who prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head.
as for titus, he is my partner and fellow worker among you; as for our brothers, they are representatives of the churches and an honor to christ.
the first thing andrew did was to find his brother simon and tell him, “we have found the messiah” (that is, the christ).
suddenly there was such a violent earthquake that the foundations of the prison were shaken. at once all the prison doors flew open, and everybody's chains came loose.
big stomach
wicked (used as a derogatory term for a child)
another time he went into the synagogue, and a man with a shriveled hand was there.
he told antonio to tell someone else.
when there is something in which brass is placed there on the bottom and sides of a shield, that is that which secures it so that it won't come apart when men fight each other with spears.
four each
and there were shepherds living out in the fields nearby, keeping watch over their flocks at night.
then jesus directed them to have all the people sit down in groups on the green grass.
three days later he called together the leaders of the jews. when they had assembled, paul said to them: "my brothers, although i have done nothing against our people or against the customs of our ancestors, i was arrested in jerusalem and handed over to the romans.
grow fast
for this reason i am sending to you timothy, my son whom i love, who is faithful in the lord. he will remind you of my way of life in christ jesus, which agrees with what i teach everywhere in every church.
here
deliberately squash
he was amazed that [the child] was always crying, but in his underlying feeling, he was agitated and he was insulting the child.
squeeze out between two hard surfaces, as sugarcane juice or lice nits from hair
philip went down to a city in samaria and proclaimed the messiah there.
you were generous toward maambago.
white skin fungus
“however, the most high does not live in houses made by human hands. as the prophet says:
"be careful," jesus warned them. "watch out for the yeast of the pharisees and that of herod."
no! but this mob that knows nothing of the law--there is a curse on them."
great great grandparent
and had john beheaded in the prison.
so i made up my mind that i would not make another painful visit to you.
on reaching the place, he said to them, "pray that you will not fall into temptation."
soft
the agalayan is a wide field. it is all corn.
who are you to judge someone else’s servant? to their own master, servants stand or fall. and they will stand, for the lord is able to make them stand.
immediately he stood up in front of them, took what he had been lying on and went home praising god.
the doctor ran out of options for ann joy. even if there was something they could do to save her, she would still die.
"then he said, 'this is what i'll do. i will tear down my barns and build bigger ones, and there i will store all my grain and my goods.
"what you are about to do, do quickly," jesus told him, but no one at the meal understood why jesus said this to him.
a person who hops steps with just one foot.
masters, provide your slaves with what is right and fair, because you know that you also have a master in heaven.
press down; compress; tightly compress; push in; depress
and he said to them, "i tell you the truth, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the kingdom of god come with power."
loud sound
convenient
the base of a mountain, that is at the bottom of the incline which is the ending of the steep part.
when the young man heard this, he went away sad, because he had great wealth.
they triumphed over him by the blood of the lamb and by the word of their testimony; they did not love their lives so much as to shrink from death.
as for a person who walks on the floor, his stepping forcefully makes a creaking noise.
by standing firm you will gain life.
moved by current
the domestic pig will be killed and eaten when it’s old and weak.
spread out one’s wings or arms.
a tan-colored, lacy-like edible fungus
all domestic animals, [various] creatures, birds, fish (lit. [edible] creatures of the water), all have their names and that is what we use to call them by their names because that is of course how we refer to them.
something, as speech, that hits its mark, or is to the point.
arrange to meet someone somewhere
be sick
bathless
that kind of persuasion does not come from the one who calls you.
he came to that which was his own, but his own did not receive him.
on the first day of the week we came together to break bread. paul spoke to the people and, because he intended to leave the next day, kept on talking until midnight.
he told them everything that had happened and sent them to joppa.
for i am already being poured out like a drink offering, and the time for my departure is near.
spread something out
stretch a basket in the making, in order to shape it and make it larger
to ram into something deliberately
they left and found things just as jesus had told them. so they prepared the passover.
if anyone destroys god's temple, god will destroy him; for god's temple is sacred, and you are that temple.
then he left them, got back into the boat and crossed to the other side.
what if he did this to make the riches of his glory known to the objects of his mercy, whom he prepared in advance for glory—
then they will go away to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.”
i have written you in my letter not to associate with sexually immoral people--
he testifies to what he has seen and heard, but no one accepts his testimony.
his eyes are like blazing fire, and on his head are many crowns. he has a name written on him that no one knows but he himself.
therefore, brothers, since we have confidence to enter the most holy place by the blood of jesus,
eraser
they are only a matter of food and drink and various ceremonial washings-- external regulations applying until the time of the new order.
the manipulation of childbirth is like pushing but just gently.
on herod’s birthday the daughter of herodias danced for the guests and pleased herod so much
chest used to store things.
to puff up or regain shape (as a cushion)
“the merchants of the earth will weep and mourn over her because no one buys their cargoes anymore—
remember those earlier days after you had received the light, when you stood your ground in a great contest in the face of suffering.
a person sent his nephew to fetch a carabao from aninipot and then his nephew really side-stepped the order because he went instead to maguiman.
we’ll dance the sagudsud
to become entangled in, as in one's problems or difficulties.
trembling and bewildered, the women went out and fled from the tomb. they said nothing to anyone, because they were afraid.
fingers and toes
a red wild chicken which has a loud crow is called batug.
i give them eternal life, and they shall never perish; no one can snatch them out of my hand.
if i fuel a fire with wood and the fire is hot/strong, it has ignited and has formed hot coals.
to leave home intending to return the same or next day
who killed the lord jesus and the prophets and also drove us out. they displease god and are hostile to all men
won’t listen
but some of them said, "by beelzebub, the prince of demons, he is driving out demons."
shake a container to check for liquid
to give life (provide sustenance)
recipe or mixture of meat or vegetables to accompany the staple of a meal
right
if your stay is long, that is “alien” because you have joined [them].
they will say, “where is this ‘coming’ he promised? ever since our ancestors died, everything goes on as it has since the beginning of creation.”
wither, as a leaf
the teachers of the law and the pharisees sit in moses’ seat.
older person; adult
for as jonah was a sign to the ninevites, so also will the son of man be to this generation.
when they heard this, they were furious and wanted to put them to death.
these things are being taken figuratively: the women represent two covenants. one covenant is from mount sinai and bears children who are to be slaves: this is hagar.
be always on the watch, and pray that you may be able to escape all that is about to happen, and that you may be able to stand before the son of man."
as it is written: “there is no one righteous, not even one;
to castrate.
because herod feared john and protected him, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man. when herod heard john, he was greatly puzzled ; yet he liked to listen to him.
we are provoked that the horse was sold and so it won't be paid for.
to have been given a long life; patient.
each person should remain in the situation they were in when god called them.
when i came to you, brothers, i did not come with eloquence or superior wisdom as i proclaimed to you the testimony about god.
when the wind is strong, it's intensity will decrease
abaca bark.
if we endure, we will also reign with him. if we disown him, he will also disown us;
i’m adding to my skirt.
bushy (hair); spread out (grains, feathers)
heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away
the horse which is being treated, with something to make him fierce, he becomes like the creatures which are likewise fierce.
but understand this: if the owner of the house had known at what time of night the thief was coming, he would have kept watch and would not have let his house be broken into.
tell a story
a tree with wide fuzzy leaves
“he cuts off every branch in me that bears no fruit, while every branch that does bear fruit he prunes so that it will be even more fruitful.”
the name of the offspring of a weasel or a mongoose is also pup.
uncle’s lung and back pain penetrates all the way through.
there is a person who has a snack of bread and he gets peanut [butter] which he spreads back and forth on it so that it will taste good
all spoke well of him and were amazed at the gracious words that came from his lips. “isn’t this joseph’s son?” they asked.
jesus said to them: "watch out that no one deceives you.
because it was the jewish day of preparation and since the tomb was nearby, they laid jesus there.
drown; be overwhelmed (as by problems)
but the centurion wanted to spare paul's life and kept them from carrying out their plan. he ordered those who could swim to jump overboard first and get to land.
claudius lysias, to his excellency, governor felix: greetings.
when herod realized that he had been outwitted by the magi, he was furious, and he gave orders to kill all the boys in bethlehem and its vicinity who were two years old and under, in accordance with the time he had learned from the magi.
may have power, together with all the lord’s holy people, to grasp how wide and long and high and deep is the love of christ,
right, correct, appropriate, enough
wherever there is a carcass, there the vultures will gather.
preference
scratch with claws
and called out in a loud voice, “jesus, master, have pity on us!”
ridgepole
when we give a warning signal, we pay attention to whether there are people -- that is when those who are suspected to be raiders no step on sticks [as they prowl]. we say, “rrrrrr”.
when the owner is about to begin [harvesting his] field, then he has many people helping him so that in about three days [they] can finish harvesting it.
thin
but he denied it before them all. “i don’t know what you’re talking about,” he said.
do you not know that your bodies are temples of the holy spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from god? you are not your own;
outhouse
two men will be in the field; one will be taken and the other left.  “where, lord?” they asked. he replied, “where there is a dead body, there the vultures will gather.”
these sweet potatoes are crowding each other because they have many tubers (lit. fruits).
fillet
so that there should be no division in the body, but that its parts should have equal concern for each other.
a good man brings good things out of the good stored up in him, and an evil man brings evil things out of the evil stored up in him.
as for soup/gravy in which starch has been added, it will become lumpy if it is not stirred.
to be show-through
successfully make purchase transaction
if someone desires to get married, he will pursue it. he will continuously discuss it with the father of the girl until he agrees.
become ethereal
i’ll use the scraps for patching
it is god’s will that you should be sanctified: that you should avoid sexual immorality;
two were racing to return to the house. one said, “if you happen to be beaten [to the destination], you will be the one to fetch water.”
severe upper epigastric pain
to satisfy or satiate (hunger, desire to relax)
[the color of the abu-on bird resembles the color of ashes. it isn't quite white; its [color] is mixed.
so he who was seated on the cloud swung his sickle over the earth, and the earth was harvested.
no one would ??? to go ahead...all the people would be included.
but thanks be to god! he gives us the victory through our lord jesus christ.
the iguana lives in the secondary forest.
“take a guard,” pilate answered. “go, make the tomb as secure as you know how.”
connect
to wrap up and bind together, as meat.
for god has put it into their hearts to accomplish his purpose by agreeing to give the beast their power to rule, until god's words are fulfilled.
all men will hate you because of me.
i tell you, it will be more bearable on that day for sodom than for that town.
the children are pretending that what they are riding are horses.
unaccustomed standing
doorway
this is how you can recognize the spirit of god: every spirit that acknowledges that jesus christ has come in the flesh is from god,
whatever happens, conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of christ. then, whether i come and see you or only hear about you in my absence, i will know that you stand firm in one spirit, contending as one man for the faith of the gospel
if the whole body were an eye, where would the sense of hearing be? if the whole body were an ear, where would the sense of smell be?
a very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road.
worship
at that time if anyone says to you, ‘look, here is the messiah!’ or, ‘there he is!’ do not believe it.
arrowhead.
"woe to you, because you are like unmarked graves, which men walk over without knowing it."
a black bead
lie
jesus took the twelve aside and told them, “we are going up to jerusalem, and everything that is written by the prophets about the son of man will be fulfilled.
to talk baby talk to a baby or pet
so jesus went with them. he was not far from the house when the centurion sent friends to say to him: “lord, don’t trouble yourself, for i do not deserve to have you come under my roof.
but other jews were jealous; so they rounded up some bad characters from the marketplace, formed a mob and started a riot in the city. they rushed to jason’s house in search of paul and silas in order to bring them out to the crowd.
bamboo container for fish
"if anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother, his wife and children, his brothers and sisters--yes, even his own life--he cannot be my disciple.
those who heard this asked, “who then can be saved?”
“you have heard that it was said to the people long ago, ‘you shall not murder, and anyone who murders will be subject to judgment.’
if you have been caught by darkness, it will be difficult for you to arrive at your dwelling place because where you travel is dark.
you spoke by the holy spirit through the mouth of your servant, our father david: ‘why do the nations rage and the peoples plot in vain?
able to see clearly and well
blessed is the man who perseveres under trial, because when he has stood the test, he will receive the crown of life that god has promised to those who love him.
by surprise
then he addressed the sanhedrin: “men of israel, consider carefully what you intend to do to these men.
to initiate (growth or process)
this stupid stairway which scares so that i nearly fell.
tip
when the harvest time approached, he sent his servants to the tenants to collect his fruit.
buoyant
but the pharisee, noticing that jesus did not first wash before the meal, was surprised.
be transformed.
the woman said, “i know that messiah” (called christ) “is coming. when he comes, he will explain everything to us.”
to be in relationship as siblings
he took her by the hand and helped her to her feet. then he called the believers and the widows and presented her to them alive.
people make holes on purpose, as outhouses or for garbage.
the cats who live in the house are smaller.
shellfish like a small clam
then one of the elders said to me, "do not weep! see, the lion of the tribe of judah, the root of david, has triumphed. he is able to open the scroll and its seven seals."
i am reminded of your sincere faith, which first lived in your grandmother lois and in your mother eunice and, i am persuaded, now lives in you also.
or those eighteen who died when the tower in siloam fell on them--do you think they were more guilty than all the others living in jerusalem?
dump out
be discouraged
there he met a jew named aquila, a native of pontus, who had recently come from italy with his wife priscilla, because claudius had ordered all jews to leave rome. paul went to see them,
then peter began to speak: “i now realize how true it is that god does not show favoritism
string fish on rattan, or string beads
confront
a mother hen, when it is afternoon, gathers her offspring under her wings.
he spoke plainly about this, and peter took him aside and began to rebuke him.
but to each one of us grace has been given as christ apportioned it.
fill a basket
if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just and will forgive us our sins and purify us from all unrighteousness.
when jesus saw his mother there, and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, "dear woman, here is your son,"
tie together
vein
so that
and pray in the spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers and requests. with this in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for all the saints.
spring of water
bank of river; beach
“in your anger do not sin”: do not let the sun go down while you are still angry,
offspring of edible bakbak frog
the spiritual did not come first, but the natural, and after that the spiritual.
we propagate the word of god.
to address
when someone is pregnant, the baby is positioned when it is not in the right position (lit. if what has happened). and when a person gives birth, [the agud] is the means of helping, by having the hands of the midwife accompany [the baby] during the birthing process.
the visitors came and found us absent from the house.
in everything set them an example by doing what is good. in your teaching show integrity, seriousness
"the time has come," he said. "the kingdom of god is near. repent and believe the good news!"
plain red material used for blouses
and isaiah boldly says, “i was found by those who did not seek me; i revealed myself to those who did not ask for me.”
he is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not only for ours but also for the sins of the whole world.
hold your lips tight together
therefore consider carefully how you listen. whoever has will be given more; whoever does not have, even what they think they have will be taken from them.”
so we make it our goal to please him, whether we are at home in the body or away from it.
if it is an adult who cries to go along, he will pressure the person into letting him come.
“why do you call me good?” jesus answered. “no one is good—except god alone.
arouse envy
when we play ball, we leap up as we throw the ball.
we are taken by surprise that we have seen someone. we are simply surprised, that's all.
take a holiday or vacation
“this perfume could have been sold at a high price and the money given to the poor.”
jesus, knowing their thoughts, took a little child and had him stand beside him.
be run over by a vehicle
we are attracted by the pretty design.
blunt
may their eyes be darkened so they cannot see, and their backs be bent forever.”
and the scripture was fulfilled that says, "abraham believed god, and it was credited to him as righteousness," and he was called god's friend.
whoever lives at his/her house, they are one household.
for, “whoever would love life and see good days must keep their tongue from evil and their lips from deceitful speech.
ear of corn
meanwhile, saul was still breathing out murderous threats against the lord’s disciples. he went to the high priest
chubby
for through the law i died to the law so that i might live for god.
repeatedly topple
go there
you can easily verify that no more than twelve days ago i went up to jerusalem to worship.
then jesus began to denounce the towns in which most of his miracles had been performed, because they did not repent.
the woman was given the two wings of a great eagle, so that she might fly to the place prepared for her in the wilderness, where she would be taken care of for a time, times and half a time, out of the serpent’s reach.
dump
this is what the ancients were commended for.
natural state
move in
therefore, brothers and sisters, we have an obligation—but it is not to the flesh, to live according to it.
so i counsel younger widows to marry, to have children, to manage their homes and to give the enemy no opportunity for slander.
edge of the waterfall.
the cats have red mites.
and had john beheaded in the prison.
crocodiles bite by snapping.
we trample the rice stems which have been harvested so that the grains of rice can be dried in the sun.
what goes into someone’s mouth does not defile them, but what comes out of their mouth, that is what defiles them.”
the middle of the space under the house.
ever since i was a [smaller] child, i haven't had a mother to attend to me and i had only one item of clothing.
but he said to them, "it is i; don't be afraid."
drink from the mother medicine that the mother has taken and which is in her milk.
same
about five in the afternoon he went out and found still others standing around. he asked them, ‘why have you been standing here all day long doing nothing?’
they requested festus, as a favor to them, to have paul transferred to jerusalem, for they were preparing an ambush to kill him along the way.
hollow.
at the time that someone was drowned at the pool, there were many who were aware who were weren't able to go to the rescue. others were stymied and unable to move.
because anyone who serves christ in this way is pleasing to god and approved by men.
the father and mother of the man and of the woman, those are the ones who are especially in the relationship between parents of spouses.
one day at about three in the afternoon he had a vision. he distinctly saw an angel of god, who came to him and said, “cornelius!”
woe to you, teachers of the law and pharisees, you hypocrites! you shut the door of the kingdom of heaven in people’s faces. you yourselves do not enter, nor will you let those enter who are trying to.
when jesus saw that he had answered wisely, he said to him, "you are not far from the kingdom of god." and from then on no one dared ask him any more questions.
shallow.

everyone will pack up and leave because there is something of which they are afraid.
the land of mindanao, because it is surrounded by the ocean, it is isolated from the land.
he who has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says to the churches.
to make a wheezy sound in a person’s lungs (who has pneumonia)
he had four unmarried daughters who prophesied.
what’s the matter with you?
if a woman says, “i will have been made pregnant,” it means, “someone has sinned against me.”
struggle against restraint
the angel swung his sickle on the earth, gathered its grapes and threw them into the great winepress of god's wrath.
when his time of service was completed, he returned home.
lick one’s chops or lips
first, they pound the tabacco with a small piece of wood. when it has become smooth, they transfer it to a small mortar and then they pound it there with a pestle.
rap or tap with one’s hand or a bolo
tell riddles at a wake
and i myself did not know him, but the one who sent me to baptize with water told me, ‘the man on whom you see the spirit come down and remain is the one who will baptize with the holy spirit.’
grace and peace to you from god our father and the lord jesus christ.
fill up the basket with rice.
the [mother's] stomach moves involuntarily
then i saw another angel coming up from the east, having the seal of the living god. he called out in a loud voice to the four angels who had been given power to harm the land and the sea:
now then, at the resurrection, whose wife will she be of the seven, since all of them were married to her?”
black
if a person forces someone down, he will press and rub their head against the ground.
what you have said in the dark will be heard in the daylight, and what you have whispered in the ear in the inner rooms will be proclaimed from the roofs.
those who had seen it told the people how the demon-possessed man had been cured.
other side, opposite side
rise! let us go! here comes my betrayer!"
this is why it is said: “wake up, sleeper, rise from the dead, and christ will shine on you.”
sing a lament for the dead
cradle
turn up
brothers, stop thinking like children. in regard to evil be infants, but in your thinking be adults.
while our presentable parts need no special treatment. but god has combined the members of the body and has given greater honor to the parts that lacked it,
we hear that some among you are idle and disruptive. they are not busy; they are busybodies.
as he taught, jesus said, "watch out for the teachers of the law. they like to walk around in flowing robes and be greeted in the marketplaces,
kind of rice
become sooty
i do all this for the sake of the gospel, that i may share in its blessings.
the priests and the captain of the temple guard and the sadducees came up to peter and john while they were speaking to the people.
run out of options
block
give up trying
and when the demon was driven out, the man who had been mute spoke. the crowd was amazed and said, “nothing like this has ever been seen in israel.”
enemy
dove
the red rat was changed from a red flying squirrel.
busy
was brought back to life
and he says in another place, “you are a priest forever, in the order of melchizedek.”
if you really keep the royal law found in scripture, "love your neighbor as yourself," you are doing right.
wean, separate from parents
gather together (as flies, ants, birds, or fish to feed)
mary was greatly troubled at his words and wondered what kind of greeting this might be.
to deviate.
if we have [a part of the field] which we will leave over, we will isection off that good part near the edge [of the field] for seed.
another angel came out of the temple in heaven, and he too had a sharp sickle.
blessed is the one who reads aloud the words of this prophecy, and blessed are those who hear it and take to heart what is written in it, because the time is near.
a person hesitates to speak because he is shy to talk to his companion if he has something he needs.
i do not write to you because you do not know the truth, but because you do know it and because no lie comes from the truth.
the sight was so terrifying that moses said, "i am trembling with fear."
swim deeply
be careful with something.
sour; to have one’s teeth set on edge from a scraping sound.
strands of long hair hanging in front of the ears
jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and when he found him, he said, "do you believe in the son of man?"
my brothers, can a fig tree bear olives, or a grapevine bear figs? neither can a salt spring produce fresh water.
one sabbath, when jesus went to eat in the house of a prominent pharisee, he was being carefully watched.
bathless
you are looking only on the surface of things. if anyone is confident that he belongs to christ, he should consider again that we belong to christ just as much as he
no, the father himself loves you because you have loved me and have believed that i came from god.
but if we say, 'from men'...." (they feared the people, for everyone held that john really was a prophet.)
then he ordered his disciples not to tell anyone that he was the messiah.
the dispute became so violent that the commander was afraid paul would be torn to pieces by them. he ordered the troops to go down and take him away from them by force and bring him into the barracks.
to punch, hit with base of fist
a person who is cleaning under the house pushes aside the debris.
if anyone is to go into captivity, into captivity they will go. if anyone is to be killed with the sword, with the sword they will be killed. this calls for patient endurance and faithfulness on the part of god’s people.
so it is with you. unless you speak intelligible words with your tongue, how will anyone know what you are saying? you will just be speaking into the air.
lisanta’s mother is complimented because she doesn’t misbehave.
black and white striped wild mongoose.
ghost
asat grated the coconut.
as they were untying the colt, its owners asked them, "why are you untying the colt?"
bird blind consisting of a tree-house
and that he appeared to cephas, and then to the twelve.
i have eaten agkud but i don't know the process of making it.
many women were there, watching from a distance. they had followed jesus from galilee to care for his needs.
put something
jesus said to them, "if god were your father, you would love me, for i came from god and now am here. i have not come on my own; but he sent me.
hard or stiff center vein or stem of a leaf
have you understood all these things?” jesus asked. “yes,” they replied.
name of a mountain near mansalinao
consequently, you are no longer foreigners and strangers, but fellow citizens with god’s people and also members of his household,
“the hired hand is not the shepherd and does not own the sheep. so when he sees the wolf coming, he abandons the sheep and runs away.”
bird
just think how great he was: even the patriarch abraham gave him a tenth of the plunder!
therefore i endure everything for the sake of the elect, that they too may obtain the salvation that is in christ jesus, with eternal glory.
one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and said to me, “come, i will show you the punishment of the great prostitute, who sits by many waters.
then he returned to the disciples and said to them, “are you still sleeping and resting? look, the hour has come, and the son of man is delivered into the hands of sinners.
was it a sin for me to lower myself in order to elevate you by preaching the gospel of god to you free of charge?
everyone has heard about your obedience, so i am full of joy over you; but i want you to be wise about what is good, and innocent about what is evil.
so he called one of the servants and asked him what was going on.
four things
then i looked and heard the voice of many angels, numbering thousands upon thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand. they encircled the throne and the living creatures and the elders.
therefore, since we have a great high priest who has ascended into heaven, jesus the son of god, let us hold firmly to the faith we profess.
to be alert, prepare for attack.
for they refreshed my spirit and yours also. such men deserve recognition.
nor does his word dwell in you, for you do not believe the one he sent.
he rarely shells corn by hand.
but during the night an angel of the lord opened the doors of the jail and brought them out.
pull up as weeds; pluck out feathers or hairs
be deprived of something
harvest
in reading this, then, you will be able to understand my insight into the mystery of christ,
if i take part in the meal with thankfulness, why am i denounced because of something i thank god for?
the raiders caught up with him.
and she gave birth to her firstborn, a son. she wrapped him in cloths and placed him in a manger, because there was no guest room available for them.
but he was not strong enough, and they lost their place in heaven.
what we sew won’t run out well.
you may be sure that such a man is warped and sinful; he is self-condemned.
if we are not entangled by sufferings..
watch over
then what was spoken by jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled: “they took the thirty pieces of silver, the price set on him by the people of israel,
i will make a storage shelter for corn.
there was a person who dismantled what wasn't his house and he destroyed the walls.
as for that [kind of] dizziness, we are the ones who go around, and if we experience vertigo, what goes around is that which we are looking at.
there is a judge for the one who rejects me and does not accept my words; that very word which i spoke will condemn him at the last day.
argumentative person
vehicle
if a person is talking, he cannot continue talking if another person squelches the one speaking. he is the one who overrides his own speech.
this is the message we have heard from him and declare to you: god is light; in him there is no darkness at all.
then he said to him, “rise and go; your faith has made you well.”
similar to lawa-an
never again will they hunger; never again will they thirst. the sun will not beat upon them, nor any scorching heat.
“all that belongs to the father is mine. that is why i said the spirit will receive from me what he will make known to you.”
when silas and timothy came from macedonia, paul devoted himself exclusively to preaching, testifying to the jews that jesus was the messiah.
similar to a molar in shape
"i am not insane, most excellent festus," paul replied. "what i am saying is true and reasonable.
and he then begins to beat his fellow servants and to eat and drink with drunkards.
the woman you saw is the great city that rules over the kings of the earth."
and will not god bring about justice for his chosen ones, who cry out to him day and night? will he keep putting them off?
the hard, intact outer shell of a dead palm tree left after the pulp has rotted out.
for just as through the disobedience of the one man the many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one man the many will be made righteous.
relative.
but a poor widow came and put in two very small copper coins, worth only a fraction of a penny.
after the people saw the miraculous sign that jesus did, they began to say, "surely this is the prophet who is to come into the world."
i’ll relate this story/information to you.
when two years had passed, felix was succeeded by porcius festus, but because felix wanted to grant a favor to the jews, he left paul in prison.
motivate
to tether or tie by a leash (as chicken, horse).
the steps there, they were extended because they were narrow at first.
any kind of taro leaves
push
when the leftover section [is harvested] there will be just one basketful left .
a very large spear.
if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just and will forgive us our sins and purify us from all unrighteousness.
fry
and, as another scripture says, "they will look on the one they have pierced."
a wild cat naturally lives in the forest.
and who serves in the sanctuary, the true tabernacle set up by the lord, not by a mere human being.
fawn all over someone
i watched as the lamb opened the first of the seven seals. then i heard one of the four living creatures say in a voice like thunder, “come!”
file (tool)
an angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
they came to john and said to him, “rabbi, that man who was with you on the other side of the jordan—the one you testified about—look, he is baptizing, and everyone is going to him.”
he’s frustrated because he has no chicken to feed to his visitors.
then another horse came out, a fiery red one. its rider was given power to take peace from the earth and to make people kill each other. to him was given a large sword.
but the temple he had spoken of was his body.
cut
smoke
whirlpool
paul greeted them and reported in detail what god had done among the gentiles through his ministry.
for christ died for sins once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to god. he was put to death in the body but made alive by the spirit,
the officers reported this to the magistrates, and when they heard that paul and silas were roman citizens, they were alarmed.
to be haunted or made ill by an evil spirit
"when the counselor comes, whom i will send to you from the father, the spirit of truth who goes out from the father, he will testify about me.
paul stayed on in corinth for some time. then he left the brothers and sisters and sailed for syria, accompanied by priscilla and aquila. before he sailed, he had his hair cut off at cenchreae because of a vow he had taken.
peter looked straight at him, as did john. then peter said, “look at us!”
crocodile
wash hands or dishes
if there are six crosswise slices, that is enough for one each as we are six people.
when the older people add up money, they go from a hundred to a thousand pesos.
ritual performed to remove a charm
when we happened to meet each other at the curve of the path, we happened to take each other by surprise. we simultaneously said, “people!”
thigh
carry on one's hip
so i will always remind you of these things, even though you know them and are firmly established in the truth you now have.
“fellow children of abraham and you god-fearing gentiles, it is to us that this message of salvation has been sent.
but when they realized he was a jew, they all shouted in unison for about two hours: "great is artemis of the ephesians!"
pity
then i heard a loud voice from the temple saying to the seven angels, “go, pour out the seven bowls of god’s wrath on the earth.”
jesus came, took the bread and gave it to them, and did the same with the fish.
“if you really know me, you will know my father as well. from now on, you do know him and have seen him.”
we look someone up and down. we look at them from top to bottom or bottom to top.
coconut
but you, brothers and sisters, are not in darkness so that this day should surprise you like a thief.
i will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven; whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.”
kind of bird
and brought back his head on a platter. he presented it to the girl, and she gave it to her mother.
weep
desire
jesus left that place and went to the vicinity of tyre. he entered a house and did not want anyone to know it; yet he could not keep his presence secret.
those tending the pigs ran off, went into the town and reported all this, including what had happened to the demon-possessed men.
i was ceremonially clean when they found me in the temple courts doing this. there was no crowd with me, nor was i involved in any disturbance.
so when you are assembled and i am with you in spirit, and the power of our lord jesus is present,
if you throw away trash, you take it to the receptacle.
this, then, is how you should pray: “our father in heaven, hallowed be your name,
when bees swarm, they just stay in their hive for a week and then leave the hive as they transfer.
camote leaves
to say one doesn't know
"do you speak greek?" he replied. "aren't you the egyptian who started a revolt and led four thousand terrorists out into the desert some time ago?"
what then? shall we sin because we are not under the law but under grace? by no means!
step over; skip; disobey; jump over
twist.
everyone who has this hope in him purifies himself, just as he is pure.
there was a great uproar, and some of the teachers of the law who were pharisees stood up and argued vigorously. “we find nothing wrong with this man,” they said. “what if a spirit or an angel has spoken to him?”
small water bird with a black head, black feathers on its back, a red breast, and a very long bill
therefore, the kingdom of heaven is like a king who wanted to settle accounts with his servants.
buck deer
to be convicted; to establish guilt
narrow, rushing stream of water
to bubble
“woman,” jesus replied, “believe me, a time is coming when you will worship the father neither on this mountain nor in jerusalem.
don’t go alone to mingle with a crowd, lest you get lost in the crowd.
ruler
if there are those in a some village who are under [someone's] authority, it seems that they are all his subjects.
platform above the hearth used for drying wood.
be discouraged
have pity on
he replied, “you of little faith, why are you so afraid?” then he got up and rebuked the winds and the waves, and it was completely calm.
after the sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week, mary magdalene and the other mary went to look at the tomb.
others that elijah had appeared, and still others that one of the prophets of long ago had come back to life.
set
they chew betelnut because they suppose it will make their teeth hard
stunned
when he was alone, the twelve and the others around him asked him about the parables.
when they brought the colt to jesus and threw their cloaks over it, he sat on it
to ask privately.
we should not commit sexual immorality, as some of them did—and in one day twenty-three thousand of them died.
evil spirit living in the hearth
the people were all so amazed that they asked each other, "what is this? a new teaching--and with authority! he even gives orders to evil spirits and they obey him."
pinch
at that time jesus said, “i praise you, father, lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children.
the mother would say something like, “get up because it is daytime.
to suffer a negative result of being interrupted
have dysentery (of baby only)
fly (insect)
surround
now instead, you ought to forgive and comfort him, so that he will not be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow.
gourd.
greet apelles, whose fidelity to christ has stood the test. greet those who belong to the household of aristobulus.
temper
lean
body, whole body
if you are enticed to sin, you are being deceived.
if you are caught on the trail at nighttime, it is difficult for you to get to your place because your pathway is dark.
you will be made rich in every way so that you can be generous on every occasion, and through us your generosity will result in thanksgiving to god.
by these waters also the world of that time was deluged and destroyed.
the comb, that is what is the multi-layered container for the honey and the larvae of the aggressive bees.
for john baptized with water, but in a few days you will be baptized with the holy spirit.”
“to the angel of the church in smyrna write: these are the words of him who is the first and the last, who died and came to life again.
for we know, brothers and sisters loved by god, that he has chosen you,
what if some were unfaithful? will their unfaithfulness nullify god’s faithfulness?
the land of mindanao, because it is surrounded by the ocean, it is isolated from the land.
borrow someone's land
this man, however, did not trace his descent from levi, yet he collected a tenth from abraham and blessed him who had the promises.
the shell and membrane of an egg
when the angels had left them and gone into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, “let’s go to bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the lord has told us about.”
to stride, take long steps
to float partially submerged like flotsam such as dead and dying fish
i'll have something given to me.
since we have these promises, dear friends, let us purify ourselves from everything that contaminates body and spirit, perfecting holiness out of reverence for god.
they cause [the house/village] to be taken by surprise when they have banded together in mass to attack so that they can kill all without exception.
therefore, as god's chosen people, holy and dearly loved, clothe yourselves with compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness and patience.
then the high priest tore his clothes and said, “he has spoken blasphemy! why do we need any more witnesses? look, now you have heard the blasphemy.
‘leave your country and your people,’ god said, ‘and go to the land i will show you.’
come across, encounter.
finger ring
now you are the body of christ, and each one of you is a part of it.
reinforcing ties
obtain viand
so then, let us not be like others, who are asleep, but let us be awake and sober.
loose (as floor bamboos)
as they entered the tomb, they saw a young man dressed in a white robe sitting on the right side, and they were alarmed.
every year jesus’ parents went to jerusalem for the festival of the passover.
embrace
grow up
the mind governed by the flesh is hostile to god; it does not submit to god’s law, nor can it do so.
jesus replied, “i will also ask you one question. if you answer me, i will tell you by what authority i am doing these things.
he called you to this through our gospel, that you might share in the glory of our lord jesus christ.
the only thing they will be discussing is how much they will pay immediately upon request as a brideprice for that girl.
for prophecy never had its origin in the will of man, but men spoke from god as they were carried along by the holy spirit.
land tax of 25 centavos or a can of tipaka.
a kind of short cogon grass.
if we love our companions and they also care about us, that is what it means to have a good relationship.
give to the one who asks you, and do not turn away from the one who wants to borrow from you.
pound
likewise, teach the older women to be reverent in the way they live, not to be slanderers or addicted to much wine, but to teach what is good.
after this, jesus and his disciples went out into the judean countryside, where he spent some time with them, and baptized.
then he said to thomas, "put your finger here; see my hands. reach out your hand and put it into my side. stop doubting and believe."
to pray or sacrifice
clearly no one who relies on the law is justified before god, because “the righteous will live by faith.”
but he took her by the hand and said, “my child, get up!”
can both fresh water and salt water flow from the same spring?
but when you fast, put oil on your head and wash your face,  so that it will not be obvious to others that you are fasting, but only to your father, who is unseen; and your father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.
for you yourselves know how you ought to follow our example. we were not idle when we were with you,
when they heard this, they praised god. then they said to paul: “you see, brother, how many thousands of jews have believed, and all of them are zealous for the law.”
mutual
a person's circumstance
this is why he has to offer sacrifices for his own sins, as well as for the sins of the people.
the high priest tore his clothes. "why do we need any more witnesses?" he asked.
for you died, and your life is now hidden with christ in god.
be perfect, therefore, as your heavenly father is perfect.
repetitive action; again
as for the person who has hemorrhoids, the veins of the rectum become distended and then they hurt when one has to defecate.
give to everyone what you owe them: if you owe taxes, pay taxes; if revenue, then revenue; if respect, then respect; if honor, then honor.
power
he was chosen before the creation of the world, but was revealed in these last times for your sake.
“how many loaves do you have?” jesus asked. “seven,” they replied, “and a few small fish.”
jesus answered him, “it is also written: ‘do not put the lord your god to the test.’”
but he denied it. "i don't know or understand what you're talking about," he said, and went out into the entryway.
tips of sweet potato plants
to stick to a job
crippled, as of hand
kick
as the soldiers were about to take paul into the barracks, he asked the commander, "may i say something to you?"
whatever medicine is effective [against] an illness, that is strong medicine
roll of fat around the waist of a baby or woman.
a pig which has horizontal stripes.
to approach someone
name of a village in the kapugi area
neither height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of god that is in christ jesus our lord.
go inside
to intentionally unravel something
now what do you know about this!
so he drove them off.
and last of all he appeared to me also, as to one abnormally born.
to titus, my true son in our common faith: grace and peace from god the father and christ jesus our savior.
cutting
a person who becomes alienated from his companion becomes an enemy.
on the first day of the week we came together to break bread. paul spoke to the people and, because he intended to leave the next day, kept on talking until midnight.
to hold something in one's mouth
to continue with something
it is thundering loudly.
patterned, mottled, color; variation in pattern and/or in color.
a proper or common name; to name something or call it by a term.
on the contrary, those parts of the body that seem to be weaker are indispensable,
jesus, knowing that they intended to come and make him king by force, withdrew again to a mountain by himself.
small basket with a cover.
is your lip twisted?
blow (with breath)
we are therefore christ's ambassadors, as though god were making his appeal through us. we implore you on christ's behalf: be reconciled to god.
so they sat down in groups of hundreds and fifties.
“my food,” said jesus, “is to do the will of him who sent me and to finish his work.
my goodness that you have been traveling in the sun when it is excessively hot.
add onto
a large poisonous black snake with a red tail.
lost
when the uproar had ended, paul sent for the disciples and, after encouraging them, said goodbye and set out for macedonia.
the hardworking farmer should be the first to receive a share of the crops.
bring the fattened calf and kill it. let's have a feast and celebrate.
again jesus began to teach by the lake. the crowd that gathered around him was so large that he got into a boat and sat in it out on the lake, while all the people were along the shore at the water's edge.
to band with metal; gold or brass trim, such as on spear
to submit
and when they climbed into the boat, the wind died down.
familiar spirit.
what do you think? if a man owns a hundred sheep and one of them wanders away, will he not leave the ninety-nine on the hills and go to look for the one that wandered off?
and even if our gospel is veiled, it is veiled to those who are perishing.
john replied in the words of isaiah the prophet, “i am the voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘make straight the way for the lord.’”
[someone else] whom we should likewise be mindful to give to are the widows who have nothing [for their family] to eat because  there is a famine now.
but after the disciples had gathered around him, he got up and went back into the city. the next day he and barnabas left for derbe.
all the neighbors were filled with awe, and throughout the hill country of judea people were talking about all these things.
to weave (cloth or blanket)
if he were on earth, he would not be a priest, for there are already priests who offer the gifts prescribed by the law.
at that time mary got ready and hurried to a town in the hill country of judea,
anyone who speaks a word against the son of man will be forgiven, but anyone who speaks against the holy spirit will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the age to come.
many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us,
if any woman who is a believer has widows in her family, she should help them and not let the church be burdened with them, so that the church can help those widows who are really in need.
for whoever does the will of my father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.”
silenced
the beast who once was, and now is not, is an eighth king. he belongs to the seven and is going to his destruction.
the first thing andrew did was to find his brother simon and tell him, “we have found the messiah” (that is, the christ).
the one to be born first is the younger sibling because he is put in the lead by the elder sibling.
when the intensity of the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the pain.
a good man brings good things out of the good stored up in his heart, and an evil man brings evil things out of the evil stored up in his heart. for the mouth speaks what the heart is full of.
jesus looked at him and said, “how hard it is for the rich to enter the kingdom of god!
when we hear a pig, it grunts. it goes “mmm” and then it runs because it is afraid of people.
continuous crying (child)
that word ig-agpas, you rush a person so that they will quickly finish something.
now you, brothers and sisters, like isaac, are children of promise.
their hair was like women's hair, and their teeth were like lions' teeth.
“don’t you believe that i am in the father, and that the father is in me? the words i say to you i do not speak on my own authority. rather, it is the father, living in me, who is doing his work.”
listen, i tell you a mystery: we will not all sleep, but we will all be changed--
who killed the lord jesus and the prophets and also drove us out. they displease god and are hostile to all men
infected sore
the hornbill has his mouth open to be fed.
at that moment she fell down at his feet and died. then the young men came in and, finding her dead, carried her out and buried her beside her husband.
black crayfish with white markings
he said this while teaching in the synagogue in capernaum.
now, for the first time, the plane has come to us.
cook rice so that we’ll take some for lunch.
when the intensity of the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the pain.
the flesh and bones of the tail of animals or reptiles.
but the mother said, "that's enough from this child who won't get rid of the subject of his arguing."
then came the day of unleavened bread on which the passover lamb had to be sacrificed.
" 'get up,' the lord said, 'and go into damascus. there you will be told all that you have been assigned to do.' my companions led me by the hand into damascus, because the brilliance of the light had blinded me.
to come into clear view.
and the two will become one flesh.' so they are no longer two, but one.
and among the lampstands was someone "like a son of man," dressed in a robe reaching down to his feet and with a golden sash around his chest.
crossroads.
jesus turned and said to them, "daughters of jerusalem, do not weep for me; weep for yourselves and for your children.
then jesus declared, “i, the one speaking to you—i am he.”
therefore, although in christ i could be bold and order you to do what you ought to do,
but if we judged ourselves, we would not come under judgment.
shed skin or outer covering, as a snake or crab
after arresting him, he put him in prison, handing him over to be guarded by four squads of four soldiers each. herod intended to bring him out for public trial after the passover.
he will be a joy and delight to you, and many will rejoice because of his birth,
for something to be forfeited as compensation for a loss
this is the verdict: light has come into the world, but people loved darkness instead of light because their deeds were evil.
ballad or chanting syle of song.
we split or open up the notched pula palm log and then we see many grubs which are squirming.
those who went ahead and those who followed shouted, "hosanna! " "blessed is he who comes in the name of the lord!"
if someone orders [someone else] to kill [somebody], he will carry out
nor because they are his descendants are they all abraham’s children. on the contrary, “it is through isaac that your offspring will be reckoned.”
we have chills when we are ill.
but jesus often withdrew to lonely places and prayed.
such people should realize that what we are in our letters when we are absent, we will be in our actions when we are present.
and how from infancy you have known the holy scriptures, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in christ jesus.
he got into one of the boats, the one belonging to simon, and asked him to put out a little from shore. then he sat down and taught the people from the boat.
this house was completed.
small flute
drink from a water pole.
when jesus entered jerusalem, the whole city was stirred and asked, “who is this?”
all the saints send you greetings, especially those who belong to caesar's household.
if we see someone to whom we are related whom we have not yet met, we feel confident toward him.
for this reason anyone who speaks in a tongue should pray that he may interpret what he says.
if we are forbidden we are negatively-commanded not to do what we were told not to do.
be joyful always;
a skin disease
to urge to do or to accept something
i was able to catch up with him.
for anyone who enters god’s rest also rests from their works, just as god did from his.
bad luck
when jesus got out of the boat, a man with an evil spirit came from the tombs to meet him.
we all fell to the ground, and i heard a voice saying to me in aramaic, 'saul, saul, why do you persecute me? it is hard for you to kick against the goads.'
uncle made a mortar which was small but the mouth was spacious and deep.
jesus answered her, “if you knew the gift of god and who it is that asks you for a drink, you would have asked him and he would have given you living water.”
now we pray to god that you will not do anything wrong—not so that people will see that we have stood the test but so that you will do what is right even though we may seem to have failed.
the birds of prey, that is the name of the birds which prey, swooping up chicks, snakes, and water creatures.
i urge you, brothers, by our lord jesus christ and by the love of the spirit, to 1698 join me in my struggle by praying to god for me.
and to the disciple, "here is your mother." from that time on, this disciple took her into his home.
but thanks be to god, who always leads us in triumphal procession in christ and through us spreads everywhere the fragrance of the knowledge of him.
there
pour out the corn which you will dry.
that
night and day we pray most earnestly that we may see you again and supply what is lacking in your faith.
these are all destined to perish with use, because they are based on human commands and teachings.
heed a warning
i have met him
and so john came, baptizing in the desert region and preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
he chose the lowly things of this world and the despised things--and the things that are not--to nullify the things that are,
light pink color
for i am the least of the apostles and do not even deserve to be called an apostle, because i persecuted the church of god.
the jews answered him, "aren't we right in saying that you are a samaritan and demon-possessed?"
to make something from something else.
there is water that is dammed up in the canal; it cannot pass.
religion that god our father accepts as pure and faultless is this: to look after orphans and widows in their distress and to keep oneself from being polluted by the world.
and they used them to buy the potter’s field, as the lord commanded me.”
there were about twelve men in all.
the leaves of the lupit tree are used like sandpaper to smooth objects such as handles, sheaths, and other wooden or bamboo items.
but timothy has just now come to us from you and has brought good news about your faith and love. he has told us that you always have pleasant memories of us and that you long to see us, just as we also long to see you.
now then, you and the sanhedrin petition the commander to bring him before you on the pretext of wanting more accurate information about his case. we are ready to kill him before he gets here."
under what circumstances was it credited? was it after he was circumcised, or before? it was not after, but before!
for i have not hesitated to proclaim to you the whole will of god.
i dumped out the corn; it was no good.
what we rejected was insufficient because he gave us a chick.
for we know that our old self was crucified with him so that the body ruled by sin might be done away with, that we should no longer be slaves to sin—
rooster with long, bushy tail feathers
as he neared damascus on his journey, suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him.  he fell to the ground and heard a voice say to him, “saul, saul, why do you persecute me?”
i begged your disciples to drive it out, but they could not.”
to carry a lunch to eat later
the seed falling on rocky ground refers to someone who hears the word and at once receives it with joy.
some people follow a creek when they travel and go uphill when they go to the mountains.
when we harvest a leaf of the alik-ik plant, [we get] just one piece.
but he replied, ‘truly i tell you, i don’t know you.’
do for a short time
on the appointed day herod, wearing his royal robes, sat on his throne and delivered a public address to the people.
light up
while evil men and impostors will go from bad to worse, deceiving and being deceived.
from my first corn harvest, only thirty sacks fit in my granary.
then judas (not judas iscariot) said, "but, lord, why do you intend to show yourself to us and not to the world?"
when this had dawned on him, he went to the house of mary the mother of john, also called mark, where many people had gathered and were praying.
"honor your father and mother"--which is the first commandment with a promise--
when his parents saw him, they were astonished. his mother said to him, “son, why have you treated us like this? your father and i have been anxiously searching for you.”
sting
for to me, to live is christ and to die is gain.
once you were alienated from god and were enemies in your minds because of your evil behavior.
smelly.
just as the son of man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”
but he wanted to justify himself, so he asked jesus, “and who is my neighbor?”
to make short, quick, side motions with a bolo on a flat surface
jesus left there and went along the sea of galilee. then he went up on a mountainside and sat down.
we sought out the disciples there and stayed with them seven days. through the spirit they urged paul not to go on to jerusalem.
they came out of the town and made their way toward him.
person deprived of companion; alone
sometimes we sneeze if we happen to smell something fragrant.
when they came to the crowd, a man approached jesus and knelt before him.
the cat pounced on a green lizard upon which it was preying as it likewise was preying on a cochroach.
i looked, and there before me was a white cloud, and seated on the cloud was one like a son of man with a crown of gold on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
time when moon shines brightly
"are you so dull?" he asked. "don't you see that nothing that enters a man from the outside can make him 'unclean'?
they got up, drove him out of the town, and took him to the brow of the hill on which the town was built, in order to throw him off the cliff.
we dove into the water.
to tear
they answered him, "we are abraham's descendants and have never been slaves of anyone. how can you say that we shall be set free?"
when he saw jesus passing by, he said, “look, the lamb of god!”
in this same way, husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. he who loves his wife loves himself.
young roach
the fin by the fish's ear is what determines the movement of the body of that fish.
are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? do all work miracles?
i’ve come in response to what you said, “you [come on] monday.”
jesus said, "if you were blind, you would not be guilty of sin; but now that you claim you can see, your guilt remains.
the sharp edge of a knife
herod had been quarreling with the people of tyre and sidon; they now joined together and sought an audience with him. having secured the support of blastus, the king’s chamberlain, they asked for peace, because they depended on the king’s country for their food supply.
just now
and for this purpose i was appointed a herald and an apostle--i am telling the truth, i am not lying--and a teacher of the true faith to the gentiles
“so he left the land of the chaldeans and settled in harran. after the death of his father, god sent him to this land where you are now living.
for an old rooster to have developed long spurs.
but some of them said, "by beelzebub, the prince of demons, he is driving out demons."
the rain has stopped.
when the sun sets, it begins to become dark.
to be energetic when walking
we accept man's testimony, but god's testimony is greater because it is the testimony of god, which he has given about his son.
the dog who is a nursing mother, when she playfully bites her offspring, she plays with her offspring. she gently bites her offspring.
eel
the people will be silenced
she came up behind him and touched the edge of his cloak, and immediately her bleeding stopped.
if you can manage [to heal] my body which has sores, remove them so that it will become well.
spasmotic coughing
where were you born?
let us therefore make every effort to do what leads to peace and to mutual edification.
break out in welts
you have been set free from sin and have become slaves to righteousness.
the debris is removed from a mat when a woman shakes it.
clay pot
as for cats, when they are in heat or their time of mating arrives, they are always meowing when it is night time.
heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
rope trap on ground, made of a noose
james, cephas and john, those esteemed as pillars, gave me and barnabas the right hand of fellowship when they recognized the grace given to me. they agreed that we should go to the gentiles, and they to the circumcised.
an argument developed between some of john’s disciples and a certain jew over the matter of ceremonial washing.
yet there are some of you who do not believe." for jesus had known from the beginning which of them did not believe and who would betray him.
upon receiving such orders, he put them in the inner cell and fastened their feet in the stocks.
early in the morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people made their plans how to have jesus executed.
we bite into and chew off corn, mangos, pangi fruit, papaya and pineapple.
type of edible shell fish which adheres to rocks or wood.
they will pile the wood on the rack.
to tie up by wrapping something around securely as many crabs or fish in a leaf
to kiss as a sign of affection
one unit or whole
clear (as water)
the roasted kernels of corn is fed to the mother who has newly given birth so that the blood clots will be discharged from her body.
“to the angel of the church in ephesus write: these are the words of him who holds the seven stars in his right hand and walks among the seven golden lampstands.
to a trumpet blast or to such a voice speaking words that those who heard it begged that no further word be spoken to them,
chew and suck on
then i heard what sounded like a voice among the four living creatures, saying, “two pounds of wheat for a day’s wages, and six pounds of barley for a day’s wages, and do not damage the oil and the wine!”
cook thoroughly
floor brace.
“just as the father knows me and i know the father—and i lay down my life for the sheep.”
trip on something
clear up
launder
imitate
"sir," they said, "from now on give us this bread."
as jesus was getting into the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed begged to go with him.
through these he has given us his very great and precious promises, so that through them you may participate in the divine nature and escape the corruption in the world caused by evil desires.
paul said, “john’s baptism was a baptism of repentance. he told the people to believe in the one coming after him, that is, in jesus.”
then peter said, “silver or gold i do not have, but what i do have i give you. in the name of jesus christ of nazareth, walk.”
deceptive, tricky
[some manuscripts include: “for an angel of the lord went down at certain seasons into the pool and stirred up the water; whoever then first, after the stirring of the water, stepped in was made well from whatever disease with which he was afflicted.”]
i have become its servant by the commission god gave me to present to you the word of god in its fullness--
rub clothes when washing
when the time came for the purification rites required by the law of moses, joseph and mary took him to jerusalem to present him to the lord
the first man was of the dust of the earth, the second man from heaven.
the black thunderheads, if they become white, they will cause it to rain hard.
long, fancy spear with metal decorations
feed
men worshiped the dragon because he had given authority to the beast, and they also worshiped the beast and asked, "who is like the beast? who can make war against him?"
in hades, where he was in torment, he looked up and saw abraham far away, with lazarus by his side.
and they began to call out to him, "hail, king of the jews!"
the child grows fast.
have sexual relations
testimony
so when he heard that lazarus was sick, he stayed where he was two more days,
make a fire
jesus then took the loaves, gave thanks, and distributed to those who were seated as much as they wanted. he did the same with the fish.
we give without charge to those who have nothing to eat.
nervously move one's foot
go into a weedy or uncut area
the child’s father and mother marveled at what was said about him.
he answered, ‘then i beg you, father, send lazarus to my family,
pay back
two days ago she fell through.
these people are not drunk, as you suppose. it’s only nine in the morning!
there was a person who lost two hundred pesos of his money. he came to an end of looking for it but didn't find it.
we repeatedly drop the seed which we are planting.
jesus replied, "no one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for service in the kingdom of god."
grace and peace to you from god the father and the lord jesus christ.
“a farmer went out to sow his seed. as he was scattering the seed, some fell along the path; it was trampled on, and the birds ate it up.
sawing motion
so then, each of us will give an account of himself to god.
to deliver something all the way to its destination
and if the spirit of him who raised jesus from the dead is living in you, he who raised christ from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies because of his spirit who lives in you.
remember lot’s wife!
wanting to satisfy the crowd, pilate released barabbas to them. he had jesus flogged, and handed him over to be crucified.
retrieve food once cached away.
"be careful," jesus warned them. "watch out for the yeast of the pharisees and that of herod."
a red male horse
when the cut field has dried up, finally [the ftrees in] the field are felled.
they were looking intently up into the sky as he was going, when suddenly two men dressed in white stood beside them.
slay
a torch
this was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet isaiah:
so he started out, and on his way he met an ethiopian eunuch, an important official in charge of all the treasury of the kandake (which means “queen of the ethiopians”). this man had gone to jerusalem to worship,  and on his way home was sitting in his chariot reading the book of isaiah the prophet.
unhusked rice
cover a heaping pot of camote
sew neatly by folding under as a hem
find
land that drinks in the rain often falling on it and that produces a crop useful to those for whom it is farmed receives the blessing of god.
and if i do what i do not want to do, i agree that the law is good.
encase
slice vegetables
i give them eternal life, and they shall never perish; no one can snatch them out of my hand.
our [relationship to] our companion will develop when our fellowship is good.
because god wanted to make the unchanging nature of his purpose very clear to the heirs of what was promised, he confirmed it with an oath.
bleed
miss, be lonesome for
a spirit who watches over the people of a place.
“before long, the world will not see me anymore, but you will see me. because i live, you also will live.”
we are attracted by the pretty design.
from the sky huge hailstones of about a hundred pounds each fell upon men. and they cursed god on account of the plague of hail, because the plague was so terrible
and i trust that you will discover that we have not failed the test.
lights likewise also blink
truly i tell you, among those born of women there has not risen anyone greater than john the baptist; yet whoever is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
on the day he comes to be glorified in his holy people and to be marveled at among all those who have believed. this includes you, because you believed our testimony to you.
“do you refuse to speak to me?” pilate said. “don’t you realize i have power either to free you or to crucify you?”
type of tree with cotton-like pods
woodpeeker
"so then, king agrippa, i was not disobedient to the vision from heaven.
and if you have not been trustworthy with someone else’s property, who will give you property of your own?
kind of large tree
when they are wriggling, your intestines are always moving about because they (lit. it) doesn’t have anything inside.
the forehead has broken out in blisters.
clap one’s hands
weak
the soldiers led jesus away into the palace (that is, the praetorium) and called together the whole company of soldiers.
nevertheless, god's solid foundation stands firm, sealed with this inscription: "the lord knows those who are his," and, "everyone who confesses the name of the lord must turn away from wickedness."
so they hurried off and found mary and joseph, and the baby, who was lying in the manger.
kind of fish (same as malandog)
give in to someone’s begging
they requested festus, as a favor to them, to have paul transferred to jerusalem, for they were preparing an ambush to kill him along the way.
name of a village on the upper liboganon river between banualoy and langilan.
nothing [bad] will happen to us.
when soup spills, the contents fall out
for a raft, there are two cross pieces which are tied to the outriggers.
let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up.
that was why his parents said, "he is of age; ask him."
in holiness and righteousness before him all our days.
and saw the lord speaking. 'quick!' he said to me. 'leave jerusalem immediately, because they will not accept your testimony about me.'
make something like new
smoky
then some pharisees and teachers of the law came to jesus from jerusalem and asked,
sit down.
i thank my god every time i remember you.
month
i would not want someone else to take any [rambatan fruits]. the meaning of that is to keep for oneself.
he told them, “the harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few. ask the lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.
jesus knew their thoughts and said to them: "any kingdom divided against itself will be ruined, and a house divided against itself will fall. if satan is divided against himself, how can his kingdom stand? i say this because you claim that i drive out demons by beelzebub.
he is before all things, and in him all things hold together.
the third angel sounded his trumpet, and a great star, blazing like a torch, fell from the sky on a third of the rivers and on the springs of water—
the person who speaks on behalf of the man is the spokesman for the discussion.
one of the teachers of the law came and heard them debating. noticing that jesus had given them a good answer, he asked him, "of all the commandments, which is the most important?"
to live; be alive
for even the son of man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."
we ought therefore to show hospitality to such men so that we may work together for the truth.
the pattern formed during the initial stage of weaving a basket.
stink bug
fetch wood
ahead of time
the man who had received five bags of gold went at once and put his money to work and gained five bags more.
do all have gifts of healing? do all speak in tongues ? do all interpret?
“you unbelieving and perverse generation,” jesus replied, “how long shall i stay with you and put up with you? bring your son here.”
the person who doesn't have an appetite , will feel unambitious to work because he has no energy.
stove
deep sound, low note
to open their eyes and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of satan to god, so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a place among those who are sanctified by faith in me.'
this is the one who came by water and blood--jesus christ. he did not come by water only, but by water and blood. and it is the spirit who testifies, because the spirit is the truth.
he would lend me two cans of rice grain, and let [me] exchange it for only one sack of unshelled rice.
she was coerced was forced into marriage.
the path of the highway which goes to sinuda, it is always twisting and turning.
wail for the dead.
break and fall over
the chief priests accused him of many things. so again pilate asked him, "aren't you going to answer? see how many things they are accusing you of."
bright yellow fruit about the size of an egg
i saw the notebook which was here on top of the table.
"there will be signs in the sun, moon and stars. on the earth, nations will be in anguish and perplexity at the roaring and tossing of the sea.
but with the precious blood of christ, a lamb without blemish or defect.
give birth in the immediate future or past (same day)
“if the world hates you, keep in mind that it hated me first.”
bang (as of a gun)
shake back and forth
the rice will be abundant if it is grown in a swampy area.
so then, just as you received christ jesus as lord, continue to live your lives in him,
all the neighbors were filled with awe, and throughout the hill country of judea people were talking about all these things.
i gave you milk, not solid food, for you were not yet ready for it. indeed, you are still not ready.
one might even say that levi, who collects the tenth, paid the tenth through abraham,
“i am the vine; you are the branches. if you remain in me and i in you, you will bear much fruit; apart from me you can do nothing.”
your attitude should be the same as that of christ jesus:
moses was educated in all the wisdom of the egyptians and was powerful in speech and action.
pebbly or bumpy surface
become, change into something else.
bask in the sun.
when someone sings oggung style, the one who sings to an accompaniment is the same one who plays the saluroy instrument.
those on the rocky ground are the ones who receive the word with joy when they hear it, but they have no root. they believe for a while, but in the time of testing they fall away.
do not repay anyone evil for evil. be careful to do what is right in the eyes of everybody.
to die because someone has fasted.
there are those who obey against their will, and there are those who willingly obey
which is really no gospel at all. evidently some people are throwing you into confusion and are trying to pervert the gospel of christ.
in the same way, he sprinkled with the blood both the tabernacle and everything used in its ceremonies.
eggbeater
be completely humble and gentle; be patient, bearing with one another in love.
the angel swung his sickle on the earth, gathered its grapes and threw them into the great winepress of god's wrath.
stomp
when we taste it and we can discern that the flavor of the broth of the pig is just right , it has become flavorful.
lita told mery that she would sleep at her [place].
destroy
to become unconscious.
name of a river and/or the village on this river which is just south of maambago.
and they used them to buy the potter’s field, as the lord commanded me.”
when pilate heard this, he was even more afraid,
the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped god, who was seated on the throne. and they cried: “amen, hallelujah!”
so that the man of god may be thoroughly equipped for every good work.
fry
and walk in the way of love, just as christ loved us and gave himself up for us as a fragrant offering and sacrifice to god.
to transfer
a woven rattan chicken carrier, that is a chicken carrier in which a chicken is placed when it is carried somewhere.
garden
but, dear friends, remember what the apostles of our lord jesus christ foretold.
no matter what i say, [my mother] won't agree to stay with her other offspring.
grieve
now, fellow israelites, i know that you acted in ignorance, as did your leaders.
wise
the law is only a shadow of the good things that are coming--not the realities themselves. for this reason it can never, by the same sacrifices repeated endlessly year after year, make perfect those who draw near to worship.
then what was said through the prophet jeremiah was fulfilled:
let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of such things god’s wrath comes on those who are disobedient.
have you suffered so much for nothing- -if it really was for nothing?
how can we thank god enough for you in return for all the joy we have in the presence of our god because of you?
we write this to make our joy complete.
peter asked, "lord, are you telling this parable to us, or to everyone?"
a kind of tree which has long thorns all over its trunk.
burdensome
"woe to you pharisees, because you love the most important seats in the synagogues and greetings in the marketplaces.
the blind and the lame came to him at the temple, and he healed them.
was not our ancestor abraham considered righteous for what he did when he offered his son isaac on the altar?
they arranged to meet paul on a certain day, and came in even larger numbers to the place where he was staying. from morning till evening he explained and declared to them the kingdom of god and tried to convince them about jesus from the law of moses and from the prophets.
who gave himself as a ransom for all people. this has now been witnessed to at the proper time.
and if you are willing to accept it, he is the elijah who was to come.
to blow off (by wind)
if you love those who love you, what reward will you get? are not even the tax collectors doing that?
why? because i do not love you? god knows i do!
monkeys always chatter.
the ear of corn in which the grains have not filled in, is corn which has not reached completion.
craving
encircle
and i will keep on doing what i am doing in order to cut the ground from under those who want an opportunity to be considered equal with us in the things they boast about.
the nations will walk by its light, and the kings of the earth will bring their splendor into it.
of either a man or woman to be sexually oriented toward the opposite sex doing work, activities and sometimes using clothing of the opposite sex.
thin
“i have told you this, so that when their time comes you will remember that i warned you about them. i did not tell you this from the beginning because i was with you.”
submit to one another out of reverence for christ.
your red rice is bending over.
leaving the crowd behind, they took him along, just as he was, in the boat. there were also other boats with him.
and so all israel will be saved, as it is written: "the deliverer will come from zion; he will turn godlessness away from jacob.
whoever acknowledges me before others, i will also acknowledge before my father in heaven.
to clap
if then i do not grasp the meaning of what someone is saying, i am a foreigner to the speaker, and he is a foreigner to me.
he/she is the parent of my child's spouse.
for my part, even though i am not physically present, i am with you in spirit. as one who is present with you in this way, i have already passed judgment in the name of our lord jesus on the one who has been doing this.
fin by the fish's ear
in his name the nations will put their hope.”
agree
it hurts if the hair gets pulled.
and wherever he went--into villages, towns or countryside--they placed the sick in the marketplaces. they begged him to let them touch even the edge of his cloak, and all who touched him were healed.
skinny
if the ministry that brought condemnation was glorious, how much more glorious is the ministry that brings righteousness!
we must pay the most careful attention, therefore, to what we have heard, so that we do not drift away.
and i saw a beast coming out of the sea. he had ten horns and seven heads, with ten crowns on his horns, and on each head a blasphemous name. the beast i saw resembled a leopard, but had feet like those of a bear and a mouth like that of a lion. the dragon gave the beast his power and his throne and great authority.
resist
they went to the chief priests and elders and said, "we have taken a solemn oath not to eat anything until we have killed paul.
the angel swung his sickle on the earth, gathered its grapes and threw them into the great winepress of god's wrath.
cut the edge of a log
adjacent house
and because of his words many more became believers.
birth
reimburse
the tenants seized his servants; they beat one, killed another, and stoned a third.
the money from his bambamboo was used up by the person whom he had entrusted with responsibility [to sell it].
oh, how strong was this crocodile
so i say, live by the spirit, and you will not gratify the desires of the sinful nature.
for bees to abandon their former hive
kind of bat
if you are enticed to sin, you are being deceived.
orphaned
when he was accused by the chief priests and the elders, he gave no answer.
isaiah said this because he saw jesus' glory and spoke about him.
to make a canal/drain to divert water
kobbiung tune.
pick up the pangi seeds because we will soak out the poisonous sap.
you will roll them up like a robe; like a garment they will be changed. but you remain the same, and your years will never end.”
that same day the sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to him with a question.
some men came down from judea to antioch and were teaching the brothers: "unless you are circumcised, according to the custom taught by moses, you cannot be saved."
then peter stood up with the eleven, raised his voice and addressed the crowd: “fellow jews and all of you who live in jerusalem, let me explain this to you; listen carefully to what i say.
small, double-woven two-piece case or wallet
they had such a sharp disagreement that they parted company. barnabas took mark and sailed for cyprus,
the water is bubbling.
a kind of small tree
therefore god exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name,
if then david calls him ‘lord,’ how can he be his son?”
cold
and if i do what i do not want to do, i agree that the law is good.
after a marriage, the man will take the woman he has married to their home for a period of time as per agreement with her parents.
boiled corn on the cob.
but how he can see now, or who opened his eyes, we don't know. ask him. he is of age; he will speak for himself."
i feel upset. (lit. my breath hurts.)
for our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms.
so the sisters sent word to jesus, “lord, the one you love is sick.”
younger.
a cleared area around a field
red-skinned camote with white flesh.
a very short person is a dwarf.
relationship between siblings
he said to me: “it is done. i am the alpha and the omega, the beginning and the end. to the thirsty i will give water without cost from the spring of the water of life.
be self-controlled and alert. your enemy the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour.
we who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak and not to please ourselves.
jesus said to him, "let the dead bury their own dead, but you go and proclaim the kingdom of god."
all these evils come from inside and make a man 'unclean.' "
but mark this: there will be terrible times in the last days.
bend
for scripture says, “do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain,” and “the worker deserves his wages.”
he will punish those who do not know god and do not obey the gospel of our lord jesus.
“bring them here to me,” he said.
the spirit clearly says that in later times some will abandon the faith and follow deceiving spirits and things taught by demons.
when christ, who is your life, appears, then you also will appear with him in glory.
the twelve gates were twelve pearls, each gate made of a single pearl. the great street of the city was of pure gold, like transparent glass.
but this is how god fulfilled what he had foretold through all the prophets, saying that his messiah would suffer.
there are different kinds of service, but the same lord.
the person who is vigorous, is strong in walking.
scrub floor with coconut husk
the person who is speaking and does not laugh, he is emphasizing the words of whatever his news is.
bees sting
move to one side
honor your father and mother,’ and ‘love your neighbor as yourself.’”
ashes
succumb
good for making lumber
though you have not seen him, you love him; and even though you do not see him now, you believe in him and are filled with an inexpressible and glorious joy,
once more jesus put his hands on the man's eyes. then his eyes were opened, his sight was restored, and he saw everything clearly.
then i saw a great white throne and him who was seated on it. earth and sky fled from his presence, and there was no place for them.
i do wish, brother, that i may have some benefit from you in the lord; refresh my heart in christ.
whose
you were running a good race. who cut in on you and kept you from obeying the truth?
they replied, “it has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and you are going to raise it in three days?”
see what large letters i use as i write to you with my own hand!
when did we see you a stranger and invite you in, or needing clothes and clothe you?
but the jews incited the god-fearing women of high standing and the leading men of the city. they stirred up persecution against paul and barnabas, and expelled them from their region.
indeed, in our hearts we felt the sentence of death. but this happened that we might not rely on ourselves but on god, who raises the dead.
on their second visit, joseph told his brothers who he was, and pharaoh learned about joseph’s family.
the only suffering which you can be ignored is that which takes one by surprise because it seems there is a difference between that which is ignored and that which is endured
go down a creek to a river junction
feel rushed
sugar
for where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
the words “it was credited to him” were written not for him alone,
be envious
each person in a given group wearing a bolo.
and not to steal from them, but to show that they can be fully trusted, so that in every way they will make the teaching about god our savior attractive.
they will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads.
suppose one of you has a servant plowing or looking after the sheep. will he say to the servant when he comes in from the field, ‘come along now and sit down to eat’?
do we, then, nullify the law by this faith? not at all! rather, we uphold the law.
to scold
they are spirits of demons performing miraculous signs, and they go out to the kings of the whole world, to gather them for the battle on the great day of god almighty.
one hundred
tree vine having a large leaf
any bird of prey including hawks/eagles and nocturnal owls
but you say that if anyone declares that what might have been used to help their father or mother is ‘devoted to god,’
and
and you also must testify, for you have been with me from the beginning.
reduce, as a price
no more
consequently, faith comes from hearing the message, and the message is heard through the word about christ.
so
succumb
improbable
ends of the earth
when they came up out of the water, the spirit of the lord suddenly took philip away, and the eunuch did not see him again, but went on his way rejoicing.
for this is the time of punishment in fulfillment of all that has been written.
catch or get
bumpy from insect bites
intention
skin rash
type of shellfish found in fresh water
when i went  to visit [someone's house], i inadvertently arrived at the same time they were eating. i said, “so you are eating.”
pour
the meaning of sug-ut is there is no charge for that horse because it was just given [free] to the child.
approach a house when the occupants are sleeping
mary magdalene and the other mary were sitting there opposite the tomb.
but jesus said to them, "i have shown you many great miracles from the father. for which of these do you stone me?"
the po-it fish, the mudfish and the catfish are directly born in a live state when they give birth.
maybe it's a possible that i could borrow your horse because i will go to patil because i will buy medicine.
men who have risked their lives for the name of our lord jesus christ.
a [camote-like] tuber with climbing vine
as for you, you were dead in your transgressions and sins,
to work by the month
i will not venture to speak of anything except what christ has accomplished through me in leading the gentiles to obey god by what i have said and done- -
but the ship struck a sandbar and ran aground. the bow stuck fast and would not move, and the stern was broken to pieces by the pounding of the surf.
finally
now you are the body of christ, and each one of you is a part of it.
for god did not send his son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him.
but if we say, ‘of human origin’—we are afraid of the people, for they all hold that john was a prophet.”
when he inquired as to the time when his son got better, they said to him, “yesterday, at one in the afternoon, the fever left him.”
but when they came to jesus and found that he was already dead, they did not break his legs.
“for them i sanctify myself, that they too may be truly sanctified.”
visit each house in a village
start a new field
the queen of the south will rise at the judgment with this generation and condemn it; for she came from the ends of the earth to listen to solomon’s wisdom, and now something greater than solomon is here.
quickly
if you acknowledge me as your companion, you also have acknowleged unisimu. the response to this is, “why shouldn't we acknowledge [him] when [he] is also our companion?”
jab
there is a person who teaches his dog how to hunt for wild pigs.
as for a dibble stick, it become flattened as it is used for planting and so we sharpen it again.
therefore, my brothers, you whom i love and long for, my joy and crown, that is how you should stand firm in the lord, dear friends!
lazy.
get out every last bit of food, or anything, from a container or bag.
and whatever you do, whether in word or deed, do it all in the name of the lord jesus, giving thanks to god the father through him.
the person who is speaking and does not laugh, he is emphasizing the words of whatever his news is.
i tell you the truth, the man who does not enter the sheep pen by the gate, but climbs in by some other way, is a thief and a robber
wild boar
and we pray this in order that you may live a life worthy of the lord and may please him in every way: bearing fruit in every good work, growing in the knowledge of god,
there was a newly married couple, and when the woman was in the beginning of pregnancy, she strongly craved the mango fruit and so she forced her spouse to get a mango for her. later, when it was already there, she was no longer hungry for it.
the airplane is able to fly because it has been repaired.
glow
but if our unrighteousness brings out god’s righteousness more clearly, what shall we say? that god is unjust in bringing his wrath on us? (i am using a human argument.)
guess, maybe
leg
"master," said john, "we saw a man driving out demons in your name and we tried to stop him, because he is not one of us."
its wood is useful as flooring.
“what shall i do, then, with jesus who is called the messiah?” pilate asked. they all answered, “crucify him!”
patient; sick person
to make something happen
and teaching them to obey everything i have commanded you. and surely i am with you always, to the very end of the age.”
unlike so many, we do not peddle the word of god for profit. on the contrary, in christ we speak before god with sincerity, as those sent from god.
immediately the rooster crowed the second time. then peter remembered the word jesus had spoken to him: "before the rooster crows twice you will disown me three times." and he broke down and wept.
and all the ways that wickedness deceives those who are perishing. they perish because they refused to love the truth and so be saved.
but no man can tame the tongue. it is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.
then paul said to the centurion and the soldiers, "unless these men stay with the ship, you cannot be saved."
watering of eyes from smoke or onions
again he stooped down and wrote on the ground.
that woman has rolls of fat around her stomach.
large pox
bite by snapping
not to weed in center of a field
even sugar and salt will melt.
do everything in love.
to be spread out (circular or with discernable boundary)
smoke out bees
but they seized him, beat him and sent him away empty-handed.
sun
i'm sending a message please that i will travel upriver to maambago.
to hunker down (hiding)
now if i drive out demons by beelzebub, by whom do your followers drive them out? so then, they will be your judges.
the person who has a reason [to visit] us will go right ahead and tell us what his reason [for coming] is. he won't wait for the person of the house to ask the reason for his coming but he will just go ahead and say what he needs.
when they had done so, they caught such a large number of fish that their nets began to break.
(the sadducees say that there is no resurrection, and that there are neither angels nor spirits, but the pharisees believe all these things.)
he replied, “you give them something to eat.” they answered, “we have only five loaves of bread and two fish—unless we go and buy food for all this crowd.”
then the lord said to him, "now then, you pharisees clean the outside of the cup and dish, but inside you are full of greed and wickedness.
jesus strictly warned them not to tell this to anyone.
as he went along, people spread their cloaks on the road.
urinate
don't continually be staying out late at night at some other house where there are young unmarried ladies.
a bagakis is a braided belt made from horse hair which has been studded with beads.
paul, an apostle of christ jesus by the will of god, and timothy our brother,
i'm going to ask how much she will have [me] give her in return
a forest plant used as a treatment for blighted fields when burned
a person who cannot endure weeding his rice field will quickly become frustrated and will stop working before finishing.
i know your deeds, that you are neither cold nor hot. i wish you were either one or the other!
“blessed are you when people insult you, persecute you and falsely say all kinds of evil against you because of me.
yet i appeal to you on the basis of love. i then, as paul--an old man and now also a prisoner of christ jesus--
at the resurrection whose wife will she be, since the seven were married to her?"
if there are those which we-excl join together, [they are] each a small unit, [or] a satallite
after a long time, their flowers/petals drop off.
i'm after the house that jeremy made but i don't yet have anything with which to pay.
blessed are those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
the water has puddled.
as i urged you when i went into macedonia, stay there in ephesus so that you may command certain people not to teach false doctrines any longer
to bridle horse.
they discussed this with one another and said, "it is because we have no bread."
to ask him, “are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?”
the promises were spoken to abraham and to his seed. scripture does not say “and to seeds,” meaning many people, but “and to your seed,” meaning one person, who is christ.
"you see the people crowding against you," his disciples answered, "and yet you can ask, 'who touched me?' "
then he said to them: "nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
the woman fled into the wilderness to a place prepared for her by god, where she might be taken care of for 1,260 days.
the horse trampled his wife.
the cat's hand was swift to claw the snake.
parthians, medes and elamites; residents of mesopotamia, judea and cappadocia, pontus and asia,
in my judgment, she is happier if she stays as she is—and i think that i too have the spirit of god.
lean over
the second
nothing in all creation is hidden from god’s sight. everything is uncovered and laid bare before the eyes of him to whom we must give account.
after a long time the master of those servants returned and settled accounts with them.
i robbed other churches by receiving support from them so as to serve you.
float
decrease, as temperature or blood pressure
to spread apart (as slats of flooring)
for a horse to rear or stand up on its hind legs.
fluff up
to go hunting with a gun or other weapon
but for those who are self-seeking and who reject the truth and follow evil, there will be wrath and anger.
the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them were the names of the twelve apostles of the lamb.
for such people are not serving our lord christ, but their own appetites. by smooth talk and flattery they deceive the minds of naive people.
the spirit told me to have no hesitation about going with them. these six brothers also went with me, and we entered the man’s house.
jesus answered, “if you want to be perfect, go, sell your possessions and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. then come, follow me.”
there was a person who cut a field and he was able to finish his work.
he replied, “because you have so little faith. truly i tell you, if you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mountain, ‘move from here to there,’ and it will move. nothing will be impossible for you.”
through whom also he went and preached to the spirits in prison
someone gave me a letter. that person whom i knew said, “i'm sending a message please that i will travel upriver to maambago.”
fire
when a rubber band pulls back, it also retracts.
even the leaves, they also drop off when they shed.
a housepost, if it is rotten, we cut it off straight across because we need to remove the rotten part. that is the reason for cutting it off straight across so that it will be straight.
therefore, in the present case i advise you: leave these men alone! let them go! for if their purpose or activity is of human origin, it will fail.
bamboo container for fish
the burrows of the marmots mound are connected underneath to the places where they make their nests.
water which does not flow has been dammed up.
i will make a storage shelter for corn.
if you have any encouragement from being united with christ, if any comfort from his love, if any fellowship with the spirit, if any tenderness and compassion,
dark
for this reason, when i could stand it no longer, i sent to find out about your faith. i was afraid that in some way the tempter had tempted you and that our labors might have been in vain.
the one who is not circumcised physically and yet obeys the law will condemn you who, even though you have the written code and circumcision, are a lawbreaker.
but they will not get very far because, as in the case of those men, their folly will be clear to everyone.
then people brought little children to jesus for him to place his hands on them and pray for them. but the disciples rebuked them.
according to his eternal purpose that he accomplished in christ jesus our lord.
to submit to such as these and to everyone who joins in the work, and labors at it.
abaca
the grace of the lord jesus christ be with your spirit.
jesus answered them, “destroy this temple, and i will raise it again in three days.”
this rice is lumpy.
the disciples did so, and everyone sat down.
he became hungry and wanted something to eat, and while the meal was being prepared, he fell into a trance.
to the married i give this command (not i, but the lord): a wife must not separate from her husband.
a woman came to him with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume, which she poured on his head as he was reclining at the table.
play
to become familiar with someone as a friend; to find out about something.
when they did not find him, they went back to jerusalem to look for him.
uproot, pull up.
collect a payment
if there is a person who actually was the one who did wrong, and then he accused someone else because he was causing his theft to be attributed [to someone else].
the person who has a kuglung instrument gets a string made from the philidendra.
so you must be careful to do everything they tell you. but do not do what they do, for they do not practice what they preach.
if it is a house which needs to be made higher, it will be jacked up slowly because it is necessary to insert props under the house posts.
we doubt that it will be paid back.
pour
jesus commanded peter, “put your sword away! shall i not drink the cup the father has given me?”
jesus replied, “you are in error because you do not know the scriptures or the power of god.
and, once made perfect, he became the source of eternal salvation for all who obey him
for if i grieve you, who is left to make me glad but you whom i have grieved?
i will just be seven [days] downriver.
in his name the nations will put their hope.”
the demons begged jesus, “if you drive us out, send us into the herd of pigs.”
shark fin
so he came down at once and welcomed him gladly.
blessed is the one whose sin the lord will never count against them.”
to him be glory in the church and in christ jesus throughout all generations, for ever and ever! amen.
it is written: “i believed; therefore i have spoken.” since we have that same spirit of faith, we also believe and therefore speak,
to become dry, as weather
people were bringing little children to jesus to have him touch them, but the disciples rebuked them.
as for that love charm, it is put around the arm or worn as a necklace.
therefore, among god’s churches we boast about your perseverance and faith in all the persecutions and trials you are enduring.
do not neglect your gift, which was given you through prophecy when the body of elders laid their hands on you.
woodpecker with red head
they brought the donkey and the colt and placed their cloaks on them for jesus to sit on.
then jesus said to them, "give to caesar what is caesar's and to god what is god's." and they were amazed at him.
the baby is developing
so he went to her, took her hand and helped her up. the fever left her and she began to wait on them.
for a horse to rear or stand up on its hind legs.
well-built
a felled tree; log.
the bees were surrounding the mosquito net which i had entered.
we are glad whenever we are weak but you are strong; and our prayer is that you may be fully restored.
therefore, my brothers, be eager to prophesy, and do not forbid speaking in tongues.
subtract
ground
why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother’s eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye?
nor because they are his descendants are they all abraham’s children. on the contrary, “it is through isaac that your offspring will be reckoned.”
a injury which breaks the skin results from a person being wounded with an instrument which breaks the skin.
“‘who are you, lord?’ i asked. “‘i am jesus of nazareth, whom you are persecuting,’ he replied.
a fishing net will ravel if it is caught on something unless it is knotted as it is being made.
then the eleven disciples went to galilee, to the mountain where jesus had told them to go.
with the help of silas, whom i regard as a faithful brother, i have written to you briefly, encouraging you and testifying that this is the true grace of god. stand fast in it.
the rice which was placed in the winnowing tray will just get spilled if there are children who will mess around with it.
retract, as wheels of an airplane
corner area of a house or room; to put away in a corner for safekeeping
so judas came to the garden, guiding a detachment of soldiers and some officials from the chief priests and the pharisees. they were carrying torches, lanterns, and weapons.
then he took the cup, gave thanks and offered it to them, and they all drank from it.
in the sixth month of elizabeth’s pregnancy, god sent the angel gabriel to nazareth, a town in galilee,
to crack
kind of bolo
radiate
plead for mercy
put
as soon as judas took the bread, satan entered into him.
after saying goodbye to each other, we went aboard the ship, and they returned home.
the visitors came and found us absent from the house.
not straight, not level, or off center
splash,
make fierce
tell, relate, as news or an event.
for we live by faith, not by sight.
i didn't catch any fish because there were those who were using a light for fishing who were illuminating the water.
the king was distressed, but because of his oaths and his dinner guests, he ordered that her request be granted
ignoring what they said, jesus told the synagogue ruler, "don't be afraid; just believe."
punishment
filled out or expanded
if they were all one part, where would the body be?
turtle
finally i checked out the fish trap and it was was |filled|with small fish which were caught in the fish trap.
so peter and the other disciple started for the tomb.
but when he asks, he must believe and not doubt, because he who doubts is like a wave of the sea, blown and tossed by the wind.
if it is burned up, he will suffer loss; he himself will be saved, but only as one escaping through the flames.
and the one who sat there had the appearance of jasper and ruby. a rainbow that shone like an emerald encircled the throne.
every day.
stir
copy
kind of bird, dark feathers on back and light-colored breast
his disciples replied, “lord, if he sleeps, he will get better.”
we are from god, and whoever knows god listens to us; but whoever is not from god does not listen to us. this is how we recognize the spirit of truth and the spirit of falsehood
a person who doesn’t fight back will be called cowardly by a person who is fierce: “you are actually a coward.”
make an effort for nothing
hair, fur, feather
now there is in store for me the crown of righteousness, which the lord, the righteous judge, will award to me on that day—and not only to me, but also to all who have longed for his appearing.
but the one who hears my words and does not put them into practice is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation. the moment the torrent struck that house, it collapsed and its destruction was complete.”
what jesus did here in cana of galilee was the first of the signs through which he revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him.
she went home and found her child lying on the bed, and the demon gone.
as he taught, jesus said, "watch out for the teachers of the law. they like to walk around in flowing robes and be greeted in the marketplaces,
inadvertently offend someone
you have brought these men here, though they have neither robbed temples nor blasphemed our goddess.
to feel better; have feeling of sadness or worry lifted.
to have an indented medial line on the stomach (as a female turtle)
just as jannes and jambres opposed moses, so also these teachers oppose the truth. they are men of depraved minds, who, as far as the faith is concerned, are rejected.
we have a small child [whose] age is about one year.
for since the creation of the world god’s invisible qualities—his eternal power and divine nature—have been clearly seen, being understood from what has been made, so that people are without excuse.
let us fix our eyes on jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith, who for the joy set before him endured the cross, scorning its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of god.
my child is good who has a good character and is industrious.
submerged just under the surface of the water
take something
to be cursed
he keeps coming back until he can obtain that which he is requesting. it is as though the person from whom he is begging is being forced to give.
breakfast
“about sin, because people do not believe in me;”
truly i tell you, you will not get out until you have paid the last penny.
but paul chose silas and left, commended by the believers to the grace of the lord.
if there are those which we-excl join together, [they are] each a small unit, [or] a satallite
and the four angels who had been kept ready for this very hour and day and month and year were released to kill a third of mankind.
the person who was cooking, he/she took a potholder which which to remove the lid of the pot because it was hot.
there was a rich man who was dressed in purple and fine linen and lived in luxury every day.
marmot
those tending the pigs ran off and reported this in the town and countryside, and the people went out to see what had happened.
a person has a circular growth of hair on his head which makes a swirl.
this will be my third visit to you. "every matter must be established by the testimony of two or three witnesses."
pour out the last drop of liquid from a container.
since you cannot do this very little thing, why do you worry about the rest?
we found a ship crossing over to phoenicia, went on board and set sail.
"is that your own idea," jesus asked, "or did others talk to you about me?"
have the appearance of something
kind of cicada
my skin has been abrazed.
while he was in bethany, reclining at the table in the home of a man known as simon the leper, a woman came with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume, made of pure nard. she broke the jar and poured the perfume on his head.
the cat pounced on a green lizard upon which it was preying as it likewise was preying on a cochroach.
to be safe or secure
the son of man will go as it has been decreed, but woe to that man who betrays him."
we know that we have come to know him if we keep his commands.
kind of long, narrow fish, similar to alu-an
a pig which has horizontal stripes.
exhortation
a person who makes a recipe from the tubod plant, grates coconut with which he makes coconut milk.
liquor
then they offered him wine mixed with myrrh, but he did not take it.
the raiders caught up with him.
honeycomb
there were some who came to meet us when we arrived at another place.
in the same way, faith by itself, if it is not accompanied by action, is dead.
he told them, "this is what is written: the christ will suffer and rise from the dead on the third day
a fetish (for harvesting rice); to tie together.
answer
jesus answered him, “simon, i have something to tell you.” “tell me, teacher,” he said.
hollow.
he took the blind man by the hand and led him outside the village. when he had spit on the man's eyes and put his hands on him, jesus asked, "do you see anything?"
"this is the covenant i will make with them after that time, says the lord. i will put my laws in their hearts, and i will write them on their minds."
if anyone forces you to go one mile, go with them two miles.
the person who is emaciated has hardly any flesh left on his or her body.
tell a story
but about the resurrection of the dead—have you not read what god said to you,
jesus, knowing their thoughts, took a little child and had him stand beside him.
the corn will be skinny. the ears will be small.
he throws a ball.
father
then judas, the one who would betray him, said, “surely you don’t mean me, rabbi?” jesus answered, “you have said so.”
as obedient children, do not conform to the evil desires you had when you lived in ignorance.
to tie up; dock, as a raft, canoe or ship
but saul learned of their plan. day and night they kept close watch on the city gates in order to kill him.
because it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins.
to be cursed, especially in regard to stewardship or rice and camote crops
and no one pours new wine into old wineskins. if he does, the new wine will burst the skins, the wine will run out and the wineskins will be ruined.
in our place, we don't show respect [to someone] unless they have been made a leader.
even the ghosts, they moan because they are trying to scare us.
they have been informed that you teach all the jews who live among the gentiles to turn away from moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or live according to our customs.
pick up the pangi seeds because we will soak out the poisonous sap.
the person does not pay attention to his own purpose.
a whole clump of bamboo was cracked when a dead tree fell on top of it.
we chipped off the surface of the luyung in order to make it thin.
my uncle said, "let's be alert because this is his trick."
and the four angels who had been kept ready for this very hour and day and month and year were released to kill a third of mankind.
if we see someone to whom we are related (lit. companion) whom we have not yet met, we feel confident toward him. we feel an openness [between us]. we are able to trust him.
in fact, none of the seven left any children. last of all, the woman died too.
if there is a horse which i will reserve, i will give a pig as a downpayment.
the hip, especially of the fleshy part but not the joint.
let us fix our eyes on jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith, who for the joy set before him endured the cross, scorning its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of god.
he thought to himself, 'what shall i do? i have no place to store my crops.'
emotionally strong (resisting undeserved abuse)
john wore clothing made of camel's hair, with a leather belt around his waist, and he ate locusts and wild honey.
filled out or expanded
faint
where he stayed three months. because some jews had plotted against him just as he was about to sail for syria, he decided to go back through macedonia.
jesus went on to say, “to what, then, can i compare the people of this generation? what are they like?
i came from the father and entered the world; now i am leaving the world and going back to the father."
and you have been given fullness in christ, who is the head over every power and authority.
and drank the same spiritual drink; for they drank from the spiritual rock that accompanied them, and that rock was christ.
to address to the husband of one’s cousin; cousin-in-law.
you make your talk consistent with ours.
but if that place is abandoned, it will be quiet; there are no more people and no talking that we can hear.
beloved
debt
mottled rice.
but whoever disowns me before others, i will disown before my father in heaven.
it was now about the sixth hour, and darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour,
those who have believing masters should not show them disrespect just because they are fellow believers. instead, they should serve them even better because their masters are dear to them as fellow believers and are devoted to the welfare of their slaves. these are the things you are to teach and insist on.
smooth bamboo good for weaving
so when we could stand it no longer, we thought it best to be left by ourselves in athens.
then he said to them, "the sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath.
when we walk, we take steps.
the pharisees and the teachers of the law began thinking to themselves, “who is this fellow who speaks blasphemy? who can forgive sins but god alone?”
short-waisted blouse.
break open
to faint or take a nap
to explain
then annas sent him, still bound, to caiaphas the high priest.
the children who are playing ambush their companions on the path.
“rejoice in that day and leap for joy, because great is your reward in heaven. for that is how their ancestors treated the prophets.
f we are unable to see our companions for a long time, we become homesick for our home place.
clouds building up
these men are springs without water and mists driven by a storm. blackest darkness is reserved for them.
carry the things on your head.
large
clear
sparkle, glisten
being confident of this, that he who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of christ jesus.
climb up
to become frustrated
angry, upset, moody, or depressed
palm heart
but he gives us more grace. that is why scripture says: "god opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble."
then the disciples came to him and asked, “do you know that the pharisees were offended when they heard this?”
your face is like a payow.
to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has freely given us in the one he loves.
the cats who live in the house are smaller.
name of village tied to spear legend
a great and wondrous sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet and a crown of twelve stars on her head.
to exchange for a like kind; to replace
that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the scriptures,
floor ankle length skirt or trousers.
if we are being called to account today for an act of kindness shown to a man who was lame and are being asked how he was healed,
once you were alienated from god and were enemies in your minds because of your evil behavior.
but women will be saved through childbearing—if they continue in faith, love and holiness with propriety.
lips.
there was someone who cut off [a piece of wood] which he would make into a single mortar.
uzziah the father of jotham, jotham the father of ahaz, ahaz the father of hezekiah,
to make a decision about something; be controlled by someone or something
but just as he who called you is holy, so be holy in all you do;
this was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet isaiah:
shiver because of cold
on the evening of that first day of the week, when the disciples were together, with the doors locked for fear of the jewish leaders, jesus came and stood among them and said, “peace be with you!”
when we hunt for frogs, when we see the eggs of the frog, we will just find the mother [frog] because she will be there closely watching over her eggs.
engagement feast
after six days jesus took peter, james and john with him and led them up a high mountain, where they were all alone. there he was transfigured before them.
to obstruct
when the disciples saw him walking on the lake, they were terrified. “it’s a ghost,” they said, and cried out in fear.
i'm going to choose a house to live in.
and with whom was he angry for forty years? was it not with those who sinned, whose bodies perished in the wilderness?
he said: “in a certain town there was a judge who neither feared god nor cared what people thought.
now jesus had not yet entered the village, but was still at the place where martha had met him.
when a manobo violin is played, its string is rubbed back and forth by its bow.
where were you born?
the light of a lamp will never shine in you again. the voice of bridegroom and bride will never be heard in you again. your merchants were the world's great men. by your magic spell all the nations were led astray.
cornelius stared at him in fear. “what is it, lord?” he asked. the angel answered, “your prayers and gifts to the poor have come up as a memorial offering before god.
to continue with something
those who oppose him he must gently instruct, in the hope that god will grant them repentance leading them to a knowledge of the truth,
to be confident
fist fight
so do not worry, saying, ‘what shall we eat?’ or ‘what shall we drink?’ or ‘what shall we wear?’
it is written: 'and he was numbered with the transgressors' ; and i tell you that this must be fulfilled in me. yes, what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment."
the spiritual did not come first, but the natural, and after that the spiritual.
"go to the village ahead of you, and as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there, which no one has ever ridden. untie it and bring it here.
travel by pair
there will be trouble and distress for every human being who does evil: first for the jew, then for the gentile;
i am sending you out like sheep among wolves. therefore be as shrewd as snakes and as innocent as doves.
go around in circles
short, fat crayfish
have someone perm their hair
the evil spirit haunts.
temper
the evening meal was in progress, and the devil had already prompted judas, the son of simon iscariot, to betray jesus.
expect
if someone gives the order [for someone] to kill [someone else], he will carry out [the order]
then i heard the angel in charge of the waters say: "you are just in these judgments, you who are and who were, the holy one, because you have so judged;
and it was not without an oath! others became priests without any oath, but he became a priest with an oath when god said to him: "the lord has sworn and will not change his mind: 'you are a priest forever.' "
and if your right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off and throw it away. it is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole body to go into hell.
whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and i in him.
these are what defile a person; but eating with unwashed hands does not defile them.”
spine, vertebrae
draw a bolo (from sheath)
the commander came up and arrested him and ordered him to be bound with two chains. then he asked who he was and what he had done.
we eat salad raw.
even is that which measures the same; neither is longer
one man's faith allows him to eat everything, but another man, whose faith is weak, eats only vegetables
but if there is a means of defense, we who are living there won’t feel insecure because our living situation will be secure.
the person who is old cannot manage to walk well because his/her knees hurt.
he said, "i will hear your case when your accusers get here." then he ordered that paul be kept under guard in herod's palace.
for many to throw something at one another.
pour on
when we are in a good relationship with our companions, if there is a small problem, it will be quickly resolved.
point out
but if i do judge, my decisions are right, because i am not alone. i stand with the father, who sent me.
love is patient, love is kind. it does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud.
blessed is the man who perseveres under trial, because when he has stood the test, he will receive the crown of life that god has promised to those who love him.
“i am the alpha and the omega,” says the lord god, “who is, and who was, and who is to come, the almighty.”
there are [some kinds of] tree(s) which fall over and then don't sprout.
it teaches us to say "no" to ungodliness and worldly passions, and to live self-controlled, upright and godly lives in this present age,
pilate called together the chief priests, the rulers and the people,
who of you by worrying can add a single hour to his life ?
but whoever is united with the lord is one with him in spirit.
think about
a kind of tree
they ran throughout that whole region and carried the sick on mats to wherever they heard he was.
when he came out, he could not speak to them. they realized he had seen a vision in the temple, for he kept making signs to them but remained unable to speak.
those whom i love i rebuke and discipline. so be earnest, and repent.
surely you remember, brothers, our toil and hardship; we worked night and day in order not to be a burden to anyone while we preached the gospel of god to you.
cliff
by faith the people passed through the red sea as on dry land; but when the egyptians tried to do so, they were drowned.
how many days
when i fetch the person, i will take the raft across to him.
rejoice in the lord always. i will say it again: rejoice!
their two stomachs were touching (lit. kissing) each other.
this is love: not that we loved god, but that he loved us and sent his son as an atoning sacrifice for our sins.
he replied, "this kind can come out only by prayer. "
even though you should happen to choose, yet if  requested is excessive, you will be unable to get it.
then peter and john placed their hands on them, and they received the holy spirit.
if he is not able, he will send a delegation while the other is still a long way off and will ask for terms of peace.
straddle
"what do you want me to do for you?" jesus asked him. the blind man said, "rabbi, i want to see."
"a man named ananias came to see me. he was a devout observer of the law and highly respected by all the jews living there.
as he looked at the writing, he looked at it carefully so that [the meaning] would not be distorted.
he must become greater; i must become less.”
as for the river/stream which has been dammed up, the body of the water is blocked.
to be terminated, as a pregnancy resulting in a miscarriage
flavor
everyone who has this hope in him purifies himself, just as he is pure.
when ghosts try to scare us, at first they say, “mmm.” after that, they make things drop in front of us.
language shorthand
shake grains
at the time that someone was drowned at the pool, there were many who were aware who were weren't able to go to the rescue. others were stymied and unable to move.
"but not during the feast," they said, "or the people may riot."
frustrated
missing
jesus warned them not to tell anyone about him.
all this took about 450 years. “after this, god gave them judges until the time of samuel the prophet.
palm heart
i was unconscious  for a half hour before i came to.
veins, of a leaf
to yell.
crunchy sound when eating something crisp
at his gate was laid a beggar named lazarus, covered with sores
take different roads
bright yellow fruit about the size of an egg
the person does not pay attention to his own purpose.
something that is read, such as a book.
disaster
and judas went to the chief priests and the officers of the temple guard and discussed with them how he might betray jesus.
he’s always laughing because he has no companions.
when they had sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of olives.
three times i was beaten with rods, once i was pelted with stones, three times i was shipwrecked, i spent a night and a day in the open sea,
to be very thin
for we must all appear before the judgment seat of christ, so that each of us may receive what is due us for the things done while in the body, whether good or bad.
if we are drunk from having drunk too much, we will be lightheaded.
we who were the ones who sowed are the ones who were cheated [because we didn't get to harvest].
as for a dog, it likes to make a bed on the fireplace while the fireplace is still warm.
sharpen with a knife
an airplane that departs from japan to america ascends, flies over the earth, and then descends.
why then didn't you put my money on deposit, so that when i came back, i could have collected it with interest?'
when jesus heard this, he said to him, “you still lack one thing. sell everything you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. then come, follow me.”
to poison
he could not do any miracles there, except lay his hands on a few sick people and heal them.
stab oneself
fast
five
he said to them, “how is it then that david, speaking by the spirit, calls him ‘lord’? for he says,
we don't have anything to loan because [we just have enough] left for one meal.
beat or whip.
this will take place on the day when god judges people’s secrets through jesus christ, as my gospel declares.
for i think it is unreasonable to send on a prisoner without specifying the charges against him."
the man who loves his life will lose it, while the man who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.
brothers, as an example of patience in the face of suffering, take the prophets who spoke in the name of the lord.
how many
get well
when the hour came, jesus and his apostles reclined at the table.
although i hope to come to you soon, i am writing you these instructions so that,
now finish the work, so that your eager willingness to do it may be matched by your completion of it, according to your means.
be on guard! be alert ! you do not know when that time will come.
the apostles performed many signs and wonders among the people. and all the believers used to meet together in solomon’s colonnade.
furthermore, just as they did not think it worthwhile to retain the knowledge of god, so god gave them over to a depraved mind, so that they do what ought not to be done.
if your love does not change to another girl, then you have identified the girl with whom you had an agreement to be the one whom you would marry.
size
limp
in the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying, "this cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you.
alexander the metalworker did me a great deal of harm. the lord will repay him for what he has done.
derogatory term for an old house
to claim something for oneself.
cradle
to finish the rim of a basket
crooked
that which we step on are the steps.
i declare to you, brothers, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of god, nor does the perishable inherit the imperishable.
these were his instructions: "take nothing for the journey except a staff--no bread, no bag, no money in your belts.
long fishing net
“two people owed money to a certain moneylender. one owed him five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
turn one’s head
eversince
the king said to the girl, "ask me for anything you want, and i'll give it to you." and he promised her with an oath, "whatever you ask i will give you, up to half my kingdom."
what did you come for?
when the boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
it's noon
rice granary
“why do you call me, ‘lord, lord,’ and do not do what i say?
dew, moisture
therefore, brothers and sisters, we have an obligation—but it is not to the flesh, to live according to it.
but if it is by the spirit of god that i drive out demons, then the kingdom of god has come upon you.
sleep outside on the ground
as for a side stream of a river, there is an outlet downstream.
the forming of the pattern, that is the agum.
emulate me in my thinking and behaviour
woven container
finish eating up rest of food
"has any of the rulers or of the pharisees believed in him?
the uncle of the young man forced his nephew into a bad situation because he had him marry someone for whom he did not yet have a desire to marry.
he must turn from evil and do good; he must seek peace and pursue it.
regarding a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space [made from the lift].
for here we do not have an enduring city, but we are looking for the city that is to come.
count.
when he met us at assos, we took him aboard and went on to mitylene.
the one who commits incest is the one who marries someone who is closely related.
a mass of twisted vines
pit
finally i checked out the fish trap and it was was filled with small fish which were caught in the fish trap.
metal hoe
nearly
bowl made of coconut shell.
abundant
sound of water splashing
sit with legs spread out
then paul called one of the centurions and said, "take this young man to the commander; he has something to tell him."
if the person's omen is bad, he will not proceed because he is being held back.
even though i may not be an apostle to others, surely i am to you! for you are the seal of my apostleship in the lord.
wake up! strengthen what remains and is about to die, for i have found your deeds unfinished in the sight of my god.
the manobos who went to manila were slow to return to davao.
cry for someone
now jesus learned that the pharisees had heard that he was gaining and baptizing more disciples than john—
so many gathered that there was no room left, not even outside the door, and he preached the word to them. some men came, bringing to him a paralytic, carried by four of them.
but suppose that servant is wicked and says to himself, ‘my master is staying away a long time,’
to be made or given a position.
put on the full armor of god so that you can take your stand against the devil's schemes.
the child who nurses and doesn't burp, it will happen to vomit up the milk.
the meaning of sug-ut is there is no charge for that horse because it was just given [free] to the child.
and if your eye causes you to stumble, gouge it out and throw it away. it is better for you to enter life with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into the fire of hell.
to stuff oneself with food
so the son of man is lord even of the sabbath."
all scripture is god-breathed and is useful for teaching, rebuking, correcting and training in righteousness,
food, especially staple food like rice or camote
when we are judged by the lord, we are being disciplined so that we will not be condemned with the world.
the smoking torch, that is what is used to make smoke to drive out the bees.
to knead
implicate someone
he has performed mighty deeds with his arm; he has scattered those who are proud in their inmost thoughts.
exclamation of surprise.
tackle
and to make plain to everyone the administration of this mystery, which for ages past was kept hidden in god, who created all things.
for on account of him many of the jews were going over to jesus and believing in him.
you became imitators of us and of the lord, for you welcomed the message in the midst of severe suffering with the joy given by the holy spirit.
and jacob the father of joseph, the husband of mary, and mary was the mother of jesus who is called the messiah.
hurry
arm, hand
i've become tired of your conduct of habitual ?? drinking
jesus looked around and said to his disciples, "how hard it is for the rich to enter the kingdom of god!"
as jesus walked beside the sea of galilee, he saw simon and his brother andrew casting a net into the lake, for they were fishermen.
my brothers, if one of you should wander from the truth and someone should bring him back,
powerful due to wealth or status
recognize because of being able to see someone clearly
for no matter how many promises god has made, they are "yes" in christ. and so through him the "amen" is spoken by us to the glory of god.
everyone was amazed and gave praise to god. they were filled with awe and said, “we have seen remarkable things today.”
while he was blessing them, he left them and was taken up into heaven.
and the way of peace they do not know.”
"when someone invites you to a wedding feast, do not take the place of honor, for a person more distinguished than you may have been invited.
weak
pestle used for pounding rice.
then they gathered around him and asked him, “lord, are you at this time going to restore the kingdom to israel?”
but if we say, 'from men,' all the people will stone us, because they are persuaded that john was a prophet."
to choke on something
none,
large loosely woven rattan carrying basket
and i trust that you will discover that we have not failed the test.
slice thinly
but grow in the grace and knowledge of our lord and savior jesus christ. to him be glory both now and forever! amen.
therefore the pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. “he put mud on my eyes,” the man replied, “and i washed, and now i see.”
go around the outside of something
some people easily come down with a cough and then get out of breath so it is difficult [for them] to breathe.
if the the [amount of] rain is a lot, the inside of the boat will be filled
the soldiers mistook us for someone else because they mistakenly supposed that we were the ones they were searching for who had escaped from the prison.
but when the jews in thessalonica learned that paul was preaching the word of god at berea, some of them went there too, agitating the crowds and stirring them up.
example, illustration, signify
small black fish (minnow)
bobbed hair
if they still refuse to listen, tell it to the church; and if they refuse to listen even to the church, treat them as you would a pagan or a tax collector.
if a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.
he did not let anyone follow him except peter, james and john the brother of james.
"but god said to him, 'you fool! this very night your life will be demanded from you. then who will get what you have prepared for yourself?'
watch out for those dogs, those evildoers, those mutilators of the flesh.
short, fat crayfish
“when he has brought out all his own, he goes on ahead of them, and his sheep follow him because they know his voice.”
this is love for god: to obey his commands. and his commands are not burdensome,
"woe to you experts in the law, because you have taken away the key to knowledge. you yourselves have not entered, and you have hindered those who were entering."
so the spies questioned him: "teacher, we know that you speak and teach what is right, and that you do not show partiality but teach the way of god in accordance with the truth.
i looked, and there before me was a pale horse! its rider was named death, and hades was following close behind him. they were given power over a fourth of the earth to kill by sword, famine and plague, and by the wild beasts of the earth.
even after jesus had done all these miraculous signs in their presence, they still would not believe in him.
we demolish arguments and every pretension that sets itself up against the knowledge of god, and we take captive every thought to make it obedient to christ.
the only thing they will be discussing is how much they will pay immediately upon request as a brideprice for that girl.
do everything you can to help zenas the lawyer and apollos on their way and see that they have everything they need.
flame
now on his way to jerusalem, jesus traveled along the border between samaria and galilee.
then jesus said to them, “do not be afraid. go and tell my brothers to go to galilee; there they will see me.”
"beware of the teachers of the law. they like to walk around in flowing robes and love to be greeted in the marketplaces and have the most important seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets.
if you love those who love you, what reward will you get? are not even the tax collectors doing that?
born after father’s death.
a kind of rattan.
to testify
“all this i will give you,” he said, “if you will bow down and worship me.”
the children are throwing corncobs at each other.
regarding a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space
if it is possible, as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone.
for something to be broken loose from something else such as blood clots
to be terminated, as a pregnancy resulting in a miscarriage
arm wrestling in a test of strength.
he said to them, "but now if you have a purse, take it, and also a bag; and if you don't have a sword, sell your cloak and buy one.
relationship of one person to many.
to smile or laugh with one's mouth closed, not showing teeth
noise
take the rambatans.
as for the bank, it was dug out at the bottom and was collapsed and washed away
the pharisees and the teachers of the law were looking for a reason to accuse jesus, so they watched him closely to see if he would heal on the sabbath.
no one could say a word in reply, and from that day on no one dared to ask him any more questions.
afterward jesus appeared again to his disciples, by the sea of galilee. it happened this way:
there is a child whose teeth are far apart. his teeth have open spaces between them.
at this the high priest ananias ordered those standing near paul to strike him on the mouth.
when you hear of wars and rumors of wars, do not be alarmed. such things must happen, but the end is still to come.
he/she doesn’t stop
if not, what did you go out to see? a man dressed in fine clothes? no, those who wear expensive clothes and indulge in luxury are in palaces.
won't share
hard or stiff center vein or stem of a leaf
hurry and fetch water because it will soon rain.
he said this because they were saying, "he has an evil spirit."
tamp an eel burrow with pounded fish poison (tuba) wrapped in bamboo
to know how
throw, toss
kind of white rice having large grains
peter said to him, “we have left all we had to follow you!”
then a mighty angel picked up a boulder the size of a large millstone and threw it into the sea, and said: “with such violence the great city of babylon will be thrown down, never to be found again.
to pull up, as a weed.
so i declared on oath in my anger, ‘they shall never enter my rest.’”
hide
skin inflammation (red and blistery)
we were obstrcted by the soldiers.
hen we were still children, we played with each other long ago and we said, “let's make make-believe rats, and so we will strike the upper arms of our companions.”
so they brought him. when the spirit saw jesus, it immediately threw the boy into a convulsion. he fell to the ground and rolled around, foaming at the mouth.
for where two or three gather in my name, there am i with them.”
work
matthew, thomas, james son of alphaeus, simon who was called the zealot,
the grown up aliwas, it is a male monkey.
the debris is removed from a mat when a woman shakes it.
there is neither jew nor gentile, neither slave nor free, nor is there male and female, for you are all one in christ jesus.
break through, as a space between two fields
this is good, and pleases god our savior,
and who also told us of your love in the spirit.
pay back
but he replied, “the man who made me well said to me, ‘pick up your mat and walk.’”
small ant
to be murdered; death after a warning
protect
grimace or grin, as a baby monkey when frightened
now this was john’s testimony when the jewish leaders in jerusalem sent priests and levites to ask him who he was.
uneven
the monkey will steal the key.
if you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask him!
like sarah, who obeyed abraham and called him her lord. you are her daughters if you do what is right and do not give way to fear.
each tree is recognized by its own fruit. people do not pick figs from thornbushes, or grapes from briers.
receive.
for, “everyone who calls on the name of the lord will be saved.”
people were bringing little children to jesus to have him touch them, but the disciples rebuked them.
"first let the children eat all they want," he told her, "for it is not right to take the children's bread and toss it to their dogs."
(as it is written in the law of the lord, “every firstborn male is to be consecrated to the lord”),
there the centurion found an alexandrian ship sailing for italy and put us on board.
the bones which are left over are fed to the dogs.
they examined me and wanted to release me, because i was not guilty of any crime deserving death.
sanglit would have given ana-ay an antidote.
if there is a landslide (lit. ground which landslides), the trees become uprooted and fall.
“i am coming to you now, but i say these things while i am still in the world, so that they may have the full measure of my joy within them.”
mother is frustrated with her field because her rice has many weeds.
we ought always to thank god for you, brothers and sisters, and rightly so, because your faith is growing more and more, and the love all of you have for one another is increasing.
an area between two mountains, that is a pass.
the person who is taken by surprise that his eyebrow hurts has a sinus-type headache.
ear wax
who has gone into heaven and is at god's right hand--with angels, authorities and powers in submission to him.
travel
cap for a roof
the center of anything circular
as john’s disciples were leaving, jesus began to speak to the crowd about john: “what did you go out into the wilderness to see? a reed swayed by the wind?
to rescue us from the hand of our enemies, and to enable us to serve him without fear
a few
shed
that conforms to the gospel concerning the glory of the blessed god, which he entrusted to me.
but food does not bring us near to god; we are no worse if we do not eat, and no better if we do.
insert into
the person who is making a house will work hard to finish making it because he will move in.
and the devil, who deceived them, was thrown into the lake of burning sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet had been thrown. they will be tormented day and night for ever and ever.
in advance
all by itself the soil produces grain-- first the stalk, then the head, then the full kernel in the head.
i am not seeking glory for myself; but there is one who seeks it, and he is the judge.
for no one can lay any foundation other than the one already laid, which is jesus christ.
and i heard a loud voice from the throne saying, “look! god’s dwelling place is now among the people, and he will dwell with them. they will be his people, and god himself will be with them and be their god.
heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse those who have leprosy, drive out demons. freely you have received; freely give.
two men wrestle with each other to discover who is the strongest.
how is it you don’t understand that i was not talking to you about bread? but be on your guard against the yeast of the pharisees and sadducees.”
there was a person who placed a noose beside the nest of a dove. then he shooed the dove and then the neck of the dove was caught in the noose because the noose tightened around its neck.
then the two told what had happened on the way, and how jesus was recognized by them when he broke the bread.
where the chief priests and the jewish leaders appeared before him and presented the charges against paul.
to disembark, to land
i wish that all of you were as i am. but each of you has your own gift from god; one has this gift, another has that.
this is the verdict: light has come into the world, but people loved darkness instead of light because their deeds were evil.
she gave birth to a son, a male child, who will rule all the nations with an iron scepter. and her child was snatched up to god and to his throne.
and when he had given thanks, he broke it and said, "this is my body, which is for you; do this in remembrance of me."
saying: “amen! praise and glory and wisdom and thanks and honor and power and strength be to our god for ever and ever. amen!”
in our place, we don't show respect to someone unless they have been made a leader.
we didn't rely on you.
guardian of the house ties
good or bad omen.
on hearing his words, some of the people said, "surely this man is the prophet."
the person who doesn't have an appetite , will feel unambitious to work because he has no energy.
scratch head with the ball of the fingers
place for racing
we can give them a free gift when they return from far off.
if a carabao crosses a large river, it will just be carried by the current.
with his wife’s full knowledge he kept back part of the money for himself, but brought the rest and put it at the apostles’ feet.
then the two told what had happened on the way, and how jesus was recognized by them when he broke the bread.
she’s screaming on account of the child; it’s about to faint.
wild betelnut with a smaller nut
pinch someone’s cheeks
i tell you, not one of those men who were invited will get a taste of my banquet.' "
even if it is high or if it is short, thick or thin and surrounds a house or the yard, it is called an alad fense.
to watch, view.
we have this hope as an anchor for the soul, firm and secure. it enters the inner sanctuary behind the curtain,
and he said to him, “i will give you all their authority and splendor; it has been given to me, and i can give it to anyone i want to.
later they sent some of the pharisees and herodians to jesus to catch him in his words.
when the sweet potatoes start to break through the soil, the soil cracks but the fruits cannot be seen yet.
but exclude the outer court; do not measure it, because it has been given to the gentiles. they will trample on the holy city for 42 months.
one man ran, filled a sponge with wine vinegar, put it on a stick, and offered it to jesus to drink. "now leave him alone. let's see if elijah comes to take him down," he said.
chin
i’ll get you off by yourself.
the sun is bright (bursts forth).
he replied to him, “who is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
for the bread of god is he who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world."
now about food sacrificed to idols: we know that we all possess knowledge. knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
suffer a surface cut
"but we have no right to execute anyone," the jews objected. this happened so that the words jesus had spoken indicating the kind of death he was going to die would be fulfilled.
uncle is continually tossing and turning. he is always turning over (lit. turning his body over) because his pain is excessive.
what harmony is there between christ and belial? or what does a believer have in common with an unbeliever?
short
the nations will walk by its light, and the kings of the earth will bring their splendor into it.
when the governor motioned for him to speak, paul replied: “i know that for a number of years you have been a judge over this nation; so i gladly make my defense.”
if you are caught on the trail at nighttime, it is difficult for you to get to your place because your pathway is dark.
listen
a kind of sugarcane (obsolete)
front
to this you were called, because christ suffered for you, leaving you an example, that you should follow in his steps.
when the cavalry arrived in caesarea, they delivered the letter to the governor and handed paul over to him.
“you have heard that it was said, ‘love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’
you were taught, with regard to your former way of life, to put off your old self, which is being corrupted by its deceitful desires;
i credited your horse first and then [as for] collecting,  you will ask about the payment for your horse.
a kind of basket (liang) woven by strands of two.
"there will be signs in the sun, moon and stars. on the earth, nations will be in anguish and perplexity at the roaring and tossing of the sea.
knot (tree joint; bamboo joint)
“jesus of nazareth,” they replied. “i am he,” jesus said. (and judas the traitor was standing there with them.)
masticate it well so that it will disintegrate; continually chew it so that you can swallow it.
fasten
it will be good for that servant whose master finds him doing so when he returns.
he will not be strong unless he is playing.
a housepost, if it is rotten, we cut it off straight across because we need to remove the rotten part. that is the reason for cutting it off straight across so that it will be straight.
the one who will claim the head is the one who carried the pig on his back.
remove water from a pool to catch fish
we’ll take [the raft] across here
all the saints send their greetings.
why is my language not clear to you? because you are unable to hear what i say.
carry on back.
alternate legs or arms when walking
buntit is teaching someone how to weave a basket and she is watching the one she is teaching.
john’s clothes were made of camel’s hair, and he had a leather belt around his waist. his food was locusts and wild honey.
harvesting tool with a sharp curved blade
week
then jesus asked, "what is the kingdom of god like? what shall i compare it to?
not quite
to have an indented medial line on the stomach (as a female turtle)
rootless camotes (due to weeds)
"the older brother became angry and refused to go in. so his father went out and pleaded with him.
a small, narrow chicken laying basket.
he said to them, "make every effort to enter through the narrow door, because many, i tell you, will try to enter and will not be able to. once the owner of the house gets up and closes the door, you will stand outside knocking and pleading, 'sir, open the door for us.' "but he will answer, 'i don't know you or where you come from.'
in the afternoon, the leaves of the baluy are smoothed out and flattened with a corn cob so they can be tightly rolled up.
for my flesh is real food and my blood is real drink.
i have made you known to them, and will continue to make you known in order that the love you have for me may be in them and that i myself may be in them."
a person who makes a field for his yearly crop of rice but doesn't live to harvest his rice because he has died, he has died before reaching his harvest and so did not get to eat his rice.
if we look carefully into water which is clear, we have a reflection there below us.
heed an order or custom
to become familiar with someone as a friend; to find out about something.
then the pharisees went out and laid plans to trap him in his words.
neighbor
whose
there in the mountains, amò is what they use amò to address [him]when they call [their] father.
"do not handle! do not taste! do not touch!"?
beckon
for there are many rebellious people, mere talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision group.
game.
to saw such as for sawing wood
offer.
‘even the dust of your town that sticks to our feet we wipe off against you. yet be sure of this: the kingdom of god has come near.’
"what do you want me to do for you?" jesus asked him. the blind man said, "rabbi, i want to see."
don’t clink the glasses together.
on hearing of this, john's disciples came and took his body and laid it in a tomb.
enough
peter, an apostle of jesus christ, to god's elect, strangers in the world, scattered throughout pontus, galatia, cappadocia, asia and bithynia,
one man ran, filled a sponge with wine vinegar, put it on a stick, and offered it to jesus to drink. "now leave him alone. let's see if elijah comes to take him down," he said.
when simon peter saw this, he fell at jesus’ knees and said, “go away from me, lord; i am a sinful man!”
to hear
cheek
and isaiah boldly says, “i was found by those who did not seek me; i revealed myself to those who did not ask for me.”
even though you have ten thousand guardians in christ, you do not have many fathers, for in christ jesus i became your father through the gospel.
for one's brow to relax.
day before yesterday.
as soon as
you have lived on earth in luxury and self-indulgence. you have fattened yourselves in the day of slaughter.
now listen, you rich people, weep and wail because of the misery that is coming upon you.
noisy
for who makes you different from anyone else? what do you have that you did not receive? and if you did receive it, why do you boast as though you did not?
some men came carrying a paralyzed man on a mat and tried to take him into the house to lay him before jesus.
clean
be wavy, have multiple curves
what's going on with you?
he has a resemblance to pogul wood because he's lazy.
for he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight. in love
the men would be enticed. in my opinion, that isn't appropriate.
our dear friend luke, the doctor, and demas send greetings.
yours
now when jesus returned, a crowd welcomed him, for they were all expecting him.
instead, one of the soldiers pierced jesus' side with a spear, bringing a sudden flow of blood and water.
they will quickly succumb to death because they are always bowing their heads.
moses was faithful as a servant in all god’s house, testifying to what would be said in the future.
wild pig's calling its young because of fear of danger
but he said to me, "do not do it! i am a fellow servant with you and with your brothers the prophets and of all who keep the words of this book. worship god!"
the elders who direct the affairs of the church well are worthy of double honor, especially those whose work is preaching and teaching.
to be healthy
bitter.
for if any macedonians come with me and find you unprepared, we—not to say anything about you—would be ashamed of having been so confident.
but accepts from every nation the one who fears him and does what is right.
"he has blinded their eyes and deadened their hearts, so they can neither see with their eyes, nor understand with their hearts, nor turn-- and i would heal them."
"o unbelieving generation," jesus replied, "how long shall i stay with you? how long shall i put up with you? bring the boy to me."
and he kept on preaching in the synagogues of judea.
wounded
sold a field he owned and brought the money and put it at the apostles’ feet.
(john testified concerning him. he cried out, saying, “this was he of whom i said, ‘he who comes after me has surpassed me because he was before me.’”)
lightning
abaca
jesus said to her, "your brother will rise again."
those who had seen it told the people what had happened to the demonpossessed man--and told about the pigs as well.
to be disappointed
there is someone who asks how many families live in that baranggay. the reply is, “there are many families who live here.”
to be inadvertently pulled up or plucked out
body louse
for the kingdom of god is not a matter of talk but of power.
nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. there will be earthquakes in various places, and famines. these are the beginning of birth pains.
pursue, as someone fleeing
i became so involved with my sewing, [that] i forgot to cook supper.
fragrant tiny bits of tree roots used in tayun (a traditional preparation)
however, i admit that i worship the god of our fathers as a follower of the way, which they call a sect. i believe everything that agrees with the law and that is written in the prophets,
see what this godly sorrow has produced in you: what earnestness, what eagerness to clear yourselves, what indignation, what alarm, what longing, what concern, what readiness to see justice done. at every point you have proved yourselves to be innocent in this matter.
“but not during the festival,” they said, “or there may be a riot among the people.”
a tabernacle was set up. in its first room were the lampstand and the table with its consecrated bread; this was called the holy place.
speak louder so that the others can hear well.
those along the path are the ones who hear, and then the devil comes and takes away the word from their hearts, so that they may not believe and be saved.
and if i drive out demons by beelzebul, by whom do your people drive them out? so then, they will be your judges.
about right
even if they sin against you seven times in a day and seven times come back to you saying ‘i repent,’ you must forgive them.”
to trip over something
black and red ata blouse
hearing that jesus had silenced the sadducees, the pharisees got together.
i wanted to know why they were accusing him, so i brought him to their sanhedrin.
tuck tail between legs
jesus said to her, "i am the resurrection and the life. he who believes in me will live, even though he dies;
he listened to paul as he was speaking. paul looked directly at him, saw that he had faith to be healed
we enter into the one singing a love song. we encourage them by saying, “continue singing love songs.” by that means, we are entering into our mutual joy.
the spines of the cococut [leaf] are what are used to make a stick broom.
to take or deliver something somewhere
tame
you, however, did not come to know christ that way
when jesus rose early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to mary magdalene, out of whom he had driven seven demons.
fence or wall around a yard, house, or garden.
painful urination.
as soon as
to be sighted, as with a gun or binoculars.
for he says, “in the time of my favor i heard you, and in the day of salvation i helped you.” i tell you, now is the time of god’s favor, now is the day of salvation.
and anyone who swears by the temple swears by it and by the one who dwells in it.
for about forty years he endured their conduct in the wilderness;
the books aren’t put away neatly yet
again, truly i tell you that if two of you on earth agree about anything they ask for, it will be done for them by my father in heaven.
speak
he has brought down rulers from their thrones but has lifted up the humble.
sell your possessions and give to the poor. provide purses for yourselves that will not wear out, a treasure in heaven that will not be exhausted, where no thief comes near and no moth destroys.
to be benighted
palm heart.
our agreement was changed because he forced me to pay [an extra amount].
it does not dishonor others, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs.
chatter to the baby.
index finger or toe.
remember this: whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows generously will also reap generously.
whoever claims to live in him must live as jesus did.
he measured its wall and it was 144 cubits thick, by man's measurement, which the angel was using.
bamboo zither (musical instrument)
god did this so that men would seek him and perhaps reach out for him and find him, though he is not far from each one of us.
keep yourselves in god's love as you wait for the mercy of our lord jesus christ to bring you to eternal life.
now a slave has no permanent place in the family, but a son belongs to it forever.
for you were like sheep going astray, but now you have returned to the shepherd and overseer of your souls.
to make alive
although he was a son, he learned obedience from what he suffered
whatever house you enter, stay there until you leave that town.
resemble
smooth breath, feeling of peace
pick up and carry something away
if a horse runs, it makes a galloping sound.
reject something as being too small or insufficient
we roll our eyes under the lids
become stormy
just as the living father sent me and i live because of the father, so the one who feeds on me will live because of me.
concerning the coming of our lord jesus christ and our being gathered to him, we ask you, brothers and sisters,
“i have the right to do anything,” you say—but not everything is beneficial. “i have the right to do anything”—but i will not be mastered by anything.
baptize
when they heard this, they were furious and wanted to put them to death.
from paphos, paul and his companions sailed to perga in pamphylia, where john left them to return to jerusalem.
always giving thanks to god the father for everything, in the name of our lord jesus christ.
moses thought that his own people would realize that god was using him to rescue them, but they did not.
when the day of pentecost came, they were all together in one place.
james, cephas and john, those esteemed as pillars, gave me and barnabas the right hand of fellowship when they recognized the grace given to me. they agreed that we should go to the gentiles, and they to the circumcised.
short baliti tree (bears fruit for birds)
and beginning with moses and all the prophets, he explained to them what was said in all the scriptures concerning himself.
‘these who were hired last worked only one hour,’ they said, ‘and you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden of the work and the heat of the day.’
when we got to rome, paul was allowed to live by himself, with a soldier to guard him.
they call the spouse of his/her sibling iras.
run away
give all
that each of you should learn to control your own body in a way that is holy and honorable,
it is not as though god’s word had failed. for not all who are descended from israel are israel.
"but the tenants said to one another, 'this is the heir. come, let's kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.'
when it rains, we break/cut off leaves for a head covering.
their fingernails were sweating.
to be afflicted with a sinus-like headache caused by withheld information.
cheer in praise, as at a game or cockfight
ruler
then i heard another voice from heaven say: “ ‘come out of her, my people,’ so that you will not share in her sins, so that you will not receive any of her plagues;
yes, father, for this is what you were pleased to do.
many of the samaritans from that town believed in him because of the woman’s testimony, “he told me everything i ever did.”
when a person becomes old, they become shriveled because they become bent over and feeble.
woe to you, teachers of the law and pharisees, you hypocrites! you travel over land and sea to win a single convert, and when you have succeeded, you make them twice as much a child of hell as you are.
go ahead and do something
i have come in my father’s name, and you do not accept me; but if someone else comes in his own name, you will accept him.
when the sweet potatoes bulge and crack the soil, they can really be seen.
two or three prophets should speak, and the others should weigh carefully what is said.
the betelnut is lacking.
flour, if it doesn't pass through a sieve, it will become lumpy.
this
i was tired of waiting for you; i [arrived] earlier
they took jesus to the high priest, and all the chief priests, elders and teachers of the law came together.
to chase
and then what he will ask is, [whether] if he is able to borrow one thousand [pesos], if perhaps he will charge interest
where is the wise man? where is the scholar? where is the philosopher of this age? has not god made foolish the wisdom of the world?
if someone walks heavily and stomps their feet, those of us who are sleeping will be awakened.
fat
(barabbas had been thrown into prison for an insurrection in the city, and for murder.)
if the afternoon of a day is nice and the time is around five in the afternoon and the clouds are red, [there is] a sunset.
when they had all had enough to eat, he said to his disciples, "gather the pieces that are left over. let nothing be wasted."
upper leg joint
if he is scolded, he won't let it bother him.
yesterday is the day which has just passed.
for if i pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my mind is unfruitful.
to move a little,
the brothers there had heard that we were coming, and they traveled as far as the forum of appius and the three taverns to meet us. at the sight of these men paul thanked god and was encouraged.
"so i say to you: ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you.
jesus said to them, "i tell you the truth, it is not moses who has given you the bread from heaven, but it is my father who gives you the true bread from heaven.
for two whole years paul stayed there in his own rented house and welcomed all who came to see him.
lie on one’s stomach
to think
then the angel said to him, “put on your clothes and sandals.” and peter did so. “wrap your cloak around you and follow me,” the angel told him.
i say to you that many will come from the east and the west, and will take their places at the feast with abraham, isaac and jacob in the kingdom of heaven.
but i want you to know that the son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins.” so he said to the paralyzed man, “get up, take your mat and go home.”
provide mounts for paul so that he may be taken safely to governor felix."
in the hope that i may somehow arouse my own people to envy and save some of them.
then you will be handed over to be persecuted and put to death, and you will be hated by all nations because of me.
to get soaked by rain
they have told the church about your love. you will do well to send them on their way in a manner worthy of god.
for if you possess these qualities in increasing measure, they will keep you from being ineffective and unproductive in your knowledge of our lord jesus christ.
see that you do not despise one of these little ones. for i tell you that their angels in heaven always see the face of my father in heaven.
see hagamhagam (worrying)
as for the person who has hemorrhoids, the veins of the rectum become distended and then they hurt when one has to defecate.
a person who is fishing on a tributary of the river blocks the tributary so that it will dry up.
to roll as a hoop.
when they had rowed three or three and a half miles, they saw jesus approaching the boat, walking on the water; and they were terrified.
bag of waters
to deviate.
a destitute person who is always being scolded, when [the criticism] affects him deeply emotionally so that he can no longer endure it, he will have to react.
when paul reached the steps, the violence of the mob was so great he had to be carried by the soldiers.
the fence is rotten.
door
for physical training is of some value, but godliness has value for all things, holding promise for both the present life and the life to come.
edible climbing plant with leaves similar to sayote
the fruit of the red pepper is hot when it is ripe.
thunder without rain
the one being pointed out  is jesus.
fellow israelites, i can tell you confidently that the patriarch david died and was buried, and his tomb is here to this day.   but he was a prophet and knew that god had promised him on oath that he would place one of his descendants on his throne.  seeing what was to come, he spoke of the resurrection of the messiah, that he was not abandoned to the realm of the dead, nor did his body see decay.
he told antonio to tell someone else.
for whenever you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the lord's death until he comes.
shoo away
the alag nut is astringent when we chew it. it is used to stop bleeding if someone has been cut.
that which we use to scrape the wood so that it will be smooth which was made into a scraper which came from balakayu bamboo.
stay put
greet one another with a holy kiss. all the churches of christ send greetings.
now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: “the one i kiss is the man; arrest him.”
skeleton
but there is a place where someone has testified: “what is mankind that you are mindful of them, a son of man that you care for him?
don’t let anyone look down on you because you are young, but set an example for the believers in speech, in conduct, in love, in faith and in purity.
to break up, turn over, as the soil in a field
if you have insomnia, you cannot sleep. you are always tossing and turning as you lay there and you are always sweating until it becomes morning.
‘the lord said to my lord: “sit at my right hand until i put your enemies under your feet.”’
temporary shelter
“rather, you are filled with grief because i have said these things.”
weave in and out, as jeeps in traffic
we know that we are children of god, and that the whole world is under the control of the evil one.
the balaring is an ear plug necklace which has decorative notches.
sore on bottom of foot
let us behave decently, as in the daytime, not in orgies and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and debauchery, not in dissension and jealousy.
to slice rattan very small
yet because i tell the truth, you do not believe me!
when you happen to encounter the gamowgamow spirit, the reason for your illness is because you become tangled up in her long hair.
and there was a widow in that town who kept coming to him with the plea, ‘grant me justice against my adversary.’
when he was at the table with them, he took bread, gave thanks, broke it and began to give it to them.
when jesus heard what had happened, he withdrew by boat privately to a solitary place. hearing of this, the crowds followed him on foot from the towns.
the water came into the boat.
a person who has caught a pig delivers a forkful to each house.
develop well, as a plant
on coming to the house, they saw the child with his mother mary, and they bowed down and worshiped him. then they opened their treasures and presented him with gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh.
these things happened to them as examples and were written down as warnings for us, on whom the fulfillment of the ages has come.
bamboo jew’s harp
thus the saying ‘one sows and another reaps’ is true.
for everyone looks out for his own interests, not those of jesus christ.
secondary forest with high, large trees
finger ring
they blindfolded him and demanded, "prophesy! who hit you?"
as they sailed, he fell asleep. a squall came down on the lake, so that the boat was being swamped, and they were in great danger.
if they have escaped the corruption of the world by knowing our lord and savior jesus christ and are again entangled in it and overcome, they are worse off at the end than they were at the beginning.
the design of your blouse is pretty.
to squeal, yelp, yell in pain or fear.
and the enemy who sows them is the devil. the harvest is the end of the age, and the harvesters are angels.
in which you used to live when you followed the ways of this world and of the ruler of the kingdom of the air, the spirit who is now at work in those who are disobedient.
ride
"then the owner of the vineyard said, 'what shall i do? i will send my son, 1555 whom i love; perhaps they will respect him.'
john's baptism--was it from heaven, or from men? tell me!"
to propagate or cause to increase (animals, seed, fish)
the gills of a fish (lit. water viand), that is what gives breath to the fish.
they have power to shut up the heavens so that it will not rain during the time they are prophesying; and they have power to turn the waters into blood and to strike the earth with every kind of plague as often as they want.
but store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where moths and vermin do not destroy, and where thieves do not break in and steal.
but the one who stands firm to the end will be saved.
therefore let us keep the festival, not with the old bread leavened with malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
surely you heard of him and were taught in him in accordance with the truth that is in jesus.
" 'well done, my good servant!' his master replied. 'because you have been trustworthy in a very small matter, take charge of ten cities.'
sleep outside on the ground
there was some bamboo on which a dead tree fell which was splintered because the whole clump was cracked.
if it is possible, as far as it depends on you, live at peace with everyone.
truly i tell you, all this will come on this generation.
pray for us. we are sure that we have a clear conscience and desire to live honorably in every way.
this is love for god: to obey his commands. and his commands are not burdensome,
but what does scripture say? “get rid of the slave woman and her son, for the slave woman’s son will never share in the inheritance with the free woman’s son.”
when we finish eating and stack the dishes, we clear the table of dishes and food.
for those who exalt themselves will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted.
when the liboganon river floods, the water is quick to recede.
while they were listening to this, he went on to tell them a parable, because he was near jerusalem and the people thought that the kingdom of god was going to appear at once.
but the widow who lives for pleasure is dead even while she lives.
wallow in mud
and he is the head of the body, the church; he is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead, so that in everything he might have the supremacy.
i'm going to move to some other place for a while.
chew
and that he appeared to cephas, and then to the twelve.
now john also was baptizing at aenon near salim, because there was plenty of water, and people were coming and being baptized.
then felix, who was well acquainted with the way, adjourned the proceedings. "when lysias the commander comes," he said, "i will decide your case."
then the whole assembly rose and led him off to pilate.
what is more, i consider everything a loss compared to the surpassing greatness of knowing christ jesus my lord, for whose sake i have lost all things. i consider them rubbish, that i may gain christ
i didn't catch any fish because there were those who were using a light for fishing who were illuminating the water.
but the world must learn that i love the father and that i do exactly what my father has commanded me. "come now; let us leave.
now, however, i am on my way to jerusalem in the service of the saints there.
so you also must be ready, because the son of man will come at an hour when you do not expect him.
hair or feathers standing on end
the dump truck which delivered the rocks, then spills them out.
two blind men were sitting by the roadside, and when they heard that jesus was going by, they shouted, “lord, son of david, have mercy on us!”
if the lord had not cut short those days, no one would survive. but for the sake of the elect, whom he has chosen, he has shortened them.
when it was full, the fishermen pulled it up on the shore. then they sat down and collected the good fish in baskets, but threw the bad away.
no, this is what was spoken by the prophet joel:
younger sibling next in age
and, after looking at himself, goes away and immediately forgets what he looks like.
enfold,
the person who doesn’t pay his debt, he contrary to [our] expectation, he lies to us saying that he will pay.
so when you give to the needy, do not announce it with trumpets, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and on the streets, to be honored by others. truly i tell you, they have received their reward in full.
shake a container to check for liquid
be on guard! be alert ! you do not know when that time will come.
we offend by our smell
then a voice came from the throne, saying: “praise our god, all you his servants, you who fear him, both great and small!”
braid
to swell up
the woman said, “because you did what you said, i discern that you are not a liar.”
all things have been committed to me by my father. no one knows the son except the father, and no one knows the father except the son and those to whom the son chooses to reveal him.
we’re cutting our fields now.
see salilung (shade, shelter)
hard or stiff center vein or stem of a leaf
clog
now a man named ananias, together with his wife sapphira, also sold a piece of property.
he is like a slave/servant of god.
other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the plants.
mery has to detour when she goes to school because there is no shortcut nearby (lit. no shortcut path here close).
“you know the way to the place where i am going.”
the rats will propagate; it mated with another rat which was not the same as itself.
twist and turn in road
the person who gets provoked, even if what we say is small, will quickly become angry.
term of address to an unmarried man, used by women and between men as a sign of respect.
when they heard this, they had no further objections and praised god, saying, “so then, even to gentiles god has granted repentance that leads to life.”
therefore, i urge you, brothers and sisters, in view of god’s mercy, to offer your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and pleasing to god—this is your true and proper worship.
its wood is useful as flooring.
as for the mother who orders her child to fetch fire and then the child just stands there for a long time, the mother will say, “for goodness sake this child is being slow when we are in a hurry to cook and there is no fire!
many people with no authority
that which is called a valley in english is a flat area which is between two mountains.
handle
a field house (in addition to main house in the village.)
a sieve
bump
a man’s enemies will be the members of his own household.’
a certain ruler asked him, “good teacher, what must i do to inherit eternal life?”
when they had seen him, they spread the word concerning what had been told them about this child,
hail (lit. "hail of rain")
loose (as floor bamboos)
the word mako-on means that what is eaten is plentiful here at nasuli and there is no famine.
he who overcomes will inherit all this, and i will be his god and he will be my son.
[she/they??] regret having married.
wash out (as a dam or bridge)
go ahead of
the people read it and were glad for its encouraging message.
when the sun is hidden by clouds
adaw was slashed with a bolo.
move in
therefore god has mercy on whom he wants to have mercy, and he hardens whom he wants to harden.
enmity toward
to bend, be bent
not only so, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for our adoption to sonship, the redemption of our bodies.
so they decided to use the money to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for foreigners.
and do not grieve the holy spirit of god, with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
the one who will claim the head is the one who carried the pig on his back.
i hope you will put up with a little of my foolishness; but you are already doing that.
for this very reason, christ died and returned to life so that he might be the lord of both the dead and the living.
they ran throughout that whole region and carried the sick on mats to wherever they heard he was.
permit
if someone [loses a loved one] by death, we comfort them by our bearing of the hurt of his/her emotional pain
in my prayers at all times; and i pray that now at last by god’s will the way may be opened for me to come to you.
small non-poisonous snake
don't you have homes to eat and drink in? or do you despise the church of god and humiliate those who have nothing? what shall i say to you? shall i praise you for this? certainly not!
but jesus took him by the hand and lifted him to his feet, and he stood up.
medium-sized smooth bamboo (used for rafts, walls, roofing)
we have become white-headed from grey hairs.
flood
remove
for i do not do the good i want to do, but the evil i do not want to do—this i keep on doing.
a stream that joins the liboganon at the same place the magimon river flows into the liboganon.
to command someone to go and do something
dear friends, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from god, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
and he overthrew seven nations in canaan, giving their land to his people as their inheritance.
lovesick
inappropriate
neighbor
“the voice spoke from heaven a second time, ‘do not call anything impure that god has made clean.’
though you do not know him, i know him. if i said i did not, i would be a liar like you, but i do know him and keep his word.
and immediately they left the boat and their father and followed him.
instead he went out and began to talk freely, spreading the news. as a result, jesus could no longer enter a town openly but stayed outside in lonely places. yet the people still came to him from everywhere.
snap in two with a sideways motion, as rattan
when the cut field has dried up, finally [the ftrees in] the field are felled.
the ones who say, andi-andì are those who are all girls who are playing.
the same thing happened to the second and third brother, right on down to the seventh.  finally, the woman died.
you will be betrayed even by parents, brothers, relatives and friends, and they will put some of you to death.
the sack will bump into and won’t go through if the doorways are too narrow.
fan, as with a hand fan
if someone is speared by a raider, the spear will pierce and go through [the body].
tie a small camote on a string as a toy.
the fourth angel poured out his bowl on the sun, and the sun was allowed to scorch people with fire.
and the devil, who deceived them, was thrown into the lake of burning sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet had been thrown. they will be tormented day and night for ever and ever.
hunger
touch the monkey
he does his work diligently. he needs to work.
a village on the liboganon river between dupitan and bulisung.
a man in the crowd called out, “teacher, i beg you to look at my son, for he is my only child.
that same day the sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to him with a question.
because anyone who has died has been set free from sin.
[as for] the person who is making a house, he works hard to finish making it because he will move in.
rap with knuckles
kind of tree.
as for the buriak spear, the shaft has been decorated and has been wrapped with bronze to make the shaft beautiful (lit. good to see) up to the reinforced tip.
“very truly i tell you, when you were younger you dressed yourself and went where you wanted; but when you are old you will stretch out your hands, and someone else will dress you and lead you where you do not want to go.”
give me some of that betelnut you’re chewing.
extra
bring along
"blessed is the king who comes in the name of the lord!" "peace in heaven and glory in the highest!"
tree roots used for planting.
have you understood all these things?” jesus asked. “yes,” they replied.
remove water from a pool to catch fish
we were not looking for praise from men, not from you or anyone else. as apostles of christ we could have been a burden to you, but we were gentle among you, like a mother caring for her little children.
when jesus landed and saw a large crowd, he had compassion on them and healed their sick.
manner of speaking
do not harden your hearts as you did in the rebellion, during the time of testing in the wilderness,
visitor, guest
they did what your power and will had decided beforehand should happen.
this money is adequate for you to reach davao.
and when they found him, they exclaimed: "everyone is looking for you!"
so they went and made the tomb secure by putting a seal on the stone and posting the guard.
the rice was spilled and scattered from the basket; it was spilled and then scattered on the ground.
scattered, infrequent in space; far apart
nobody should seek his own good, but the good of others.
truly i tell you, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
they had breastplates like breastplates of iron, and the sound of their wings was like the thundering of many horses and chariots rushing into battle.
buliung will pole the raft with the old one.
plant seedlings of tobacco or papaya.
joaquin claims the residents of maambago as his subjects.
from this time many of his disciples turned back and no longer followed him.
but go and learn what this means: ‘i desire mercy, not sacrifice.’ for i have not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”
when we are slashing rattan and it hasn’t yet separated [from the vine] we continue cutting it until it has been  severed.
if our blood is lacking we will be lightheaded when we walk and we won't be able to manage well to get around.
armband, used as a charm.
and so from this one man, and he as good as dead, came descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and as countless as the sand on the seashore.
jesus answered, "i tell you the truth, you are looking for me, not because you saw miraculous signs but because you ate the loaves and had your fill.
we tear off one piece of paper.
but the one who does not know and does things deserving punishment will be beaten with few blows. from everyone who has been given much, much will be demanded; and from the one who has been entrusted with much, much more will be asked.
get out of the way; step to the side of the path so a horse or person may go by.
scream.
sonny, chase away the chickens which are eating the rice which is being dried in the sun.
very good; made very well
to plant
we sent timothy, who is our brother and co-worker in god’s service in spreading the gospel of christ, to strengthen and encourage you in your faith,
whom he poured out on us generously through jesus christ our savior,
fly out of something
travel directly to one’s destination without delay
our desire is not that others might be relieved while you are hard pressed, but that there might be equality.  at the present time your plenty will supply what they need, so that in turn their plenty will supply what you need. the goal is equality,
haul downriver
if your hand causes you to sin, cut it off. it is better for you to enter life maimed than with two hands to go into hell, where the fire never goes out. where " 'their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.'
in my former book, theophilus, i wrote about all that jesus began to do and to teach  until the day he was taken up to heaven, after giving instructions through the holy spirit to the apostles he had chosen.
now the berean jews were of more noble character than those in thessalonica, for they received the message with great eagerness and examined the scriptures every day to see if what paul said was true.
off and on showers
then one of the twelve—the one called judas iscariot—went to the chief priests
about five in the afternoon he went out and found still others standing around. he asked them, ‘why have you been standing here all day long doing nothing?’
we search for the offspring.
you are doing the things your own father does." "we are not illegitimate children," they protested. "the only father we have is god himself."
adjacent
they took jesus to the high priest, and all the chief priests, elders and teachers of the law came together.
and in their prayers for you their hearts will go out to you, because of the surpassing grace god has given you.
some people are slow to get out of breath when he/she swims underwater and touches the bottom of a deep pool.
intentionally break off
and he swore by him who lives for ever and ever, who created the heavens and all that is in them, the earth and all that is in it, and the sea and all that is in it, and said, “there will be no more delay!
inlet
so go to the street corners and invite to the banquet anyone you find.’
when he was twelve years old, they went up to the festival, according to the custom.
but whoever loves god is known by god.
with them they sent the following letter: the apostles and elders, your brothers, to the gentile believers in antioch, syria and cilicia: greetings.
the widow said, "i'm after the house that jeremy made but i don't yet have anything to use for payment."
this is what we speak, not in words taught us by human wisdom but in words taught by the spirit, expressing spiritual truths in spiritual words.
a kind of spear
the kabal hangs back-side down when it walks and is exceedingly slow to move.
deep wound
he came and took the scroll from the right hand of him who sat on the throne.
then the devil left him, and angels came and attended him.
is the cat perhaps older than the horse?
kind of tree fruit, eaten by rats,
anyone who believes in the son of god has this testimony in his heart. anyone who does not believe god has made him out to be a liar, because he has not believed the testimony god has given about his son.
“you are israel’s teacher,” said jesus, “and do you not understand these things?
so they answered jesus, “we don’t know.” then he said, “neither will i tell you by what authority i am doing these things.
there is a kind of rain which we call saginwalu.
where she entered zechariah’s home and greeted elizabeth.
half
i know that when i come to you, i will come in the full measure of the blessing of christ.
this is especially true of those who follow the corrupt desire of the sinful nature and despise authority
convenient
dirty
he did not need any testimony about mankind, for he knew what was in each person.
we get goose pimples and the small hairs on our arms stand up.
paul, a servant of god and an apostle of jesus christ to further the faith of god’s elect and their knowledge of the truth that leads to godliness—
and now, dear children, continue in him, so that when he appears we may be confident and unashamed before him at his coming.
every valley shall be filled in, every mountain and hill made low. the crooked roads shall become straight, the rough ways smooth.
overtaken by darkness
so he went and hired himself out to a citizen of that country, who sent him to his fields to feed pigs.
the one who comes from above is above all; the one who is from the earth belongs to the earth, and speaks as one from the earth. the one who comes from heaven is above all.
swing
"teacher," they said, "moses wrote for us that if a man's brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man must marry the widow and have children for his brother.
tomorrow
at the sixth hour darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour.
therefore, brothers and sisters, we are not children of the slave woman, but of the free woman.
big
potty or bladder
the people ate and were satisfied. afterward the disciples picked up seven basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over. about four thousand men were present. and having sent them away,
some people follow a creek when they travel and go uphill when they go to the mountains.
you be the ones [to discuss it] with her first.
solitary tree
when people have a meeting, [and] when the meeting is finished, the people leaving for home clear out.
for to which of the angels did god ever say, “you are my son; today i have become your father”? or again, “i will be his father, and he will be my son”?
fall out
a grown pig.
when we make a deposit on something, we give a piece of material as a deposit to reserve a piglet.
look squeeze on this papaya, maybe it is ripe.
when we go downriver by raft, when we return we pull the gakit in going upriver against the current.
when there is a dry spell, the ground becomes difficult to dig.
if he has done you any wrong or owes you anything, charge it to me.
the house which was not finished in the making, it wasn't completed.
a person
see to it that no one takes you captive through hollow and deceptive philosophy, which depends on human tradition and the elemental spiritual forces of this world rather than on christ.
if for example we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done at the beginning is supplanted and then we are drawn away to something else so that we didn't accomplish [what we started out to do].
cut off
kind of basket (liang) woven by strands of three and has a pattern on four sides.
“write, therefore, what you have seen, what is now and what will take place later.
therefore god again set a certain day, calling it today, when a long time later he spoke through david, as was said before: "today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts."
there is someone who reads something over and over so that he/she can memorize it.
to the pure, all things are pure, but to those who are corrupted and do not believe, nothing is pure. in fact, both their minds and consciences are corrupted.
“and i will ask the father, and he will give you another advocate to help you and be with you forever—”
good character
do you want to drink coffee?
as for younger widows, do not put them on such a list. for when their sensual desires overcome their dedication to christ, they want to marry.
after this he went down to capernaum with his mother and brothers and his disciples. there they stayed for a few days.
john answered, “anyone who has two shirts should share with the one who has none, and anyone who has food should do the same.”
for example, by law a married woman is bound to her husband as long as he is alive, but if her husband dies, she is released from the law that binds her to him.
for we are taking pains to do what is right, not only in the eyes of the lord but also in the eyes of man.
he claims relationships with those who aren't his [real] younger-siblings. he is always paling-around-like-family with us.
painful, cracked feet from soaking in water
show proper respect to everyone: love the brotherhood of believers, fear god, honor the king.
to have something thrown at oneself, as when playing dodge ball
we had previously suffered and been treated outrageously in philippi, as you know, but with the help of our god we dared to tell you his gospel in the face of strong opposition.
i tell you, use worldly wealth to gain friends for yourselves, so that when it is gone, you will be welcomed into eternal dwellings.
to swing baby in swing
“i baptize with water,” john replied, “but among you stands one you do not know.
on the third day a wedding took place at cana in galilee. jesus’ mother was there,
for surely it is not angels he helps, but abraham’s descendants.
swim deeply underwater
your kingdom come, your will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.
to fondle a baby
to step,
he was a good man, full of the holy spirit and faith, and a great number of people were brought to the lord.
rectum
when he opened the fifth seal, i saw under the altar the souls of those who had been slain because of the word of god and the testimony they had maintained.
my father said, "start your motor because i will go first, and you will follow my motorboat wherever i go."
pronged fish spear
the two countries are at war with each other.
when something gleams like gold, its glint is beautiful. its gleam is soft.
to pull up, as a weed.
his neighbors and those who had formerly seen him begging asked, “isn’t this the same man who used to sit and beg?”
“we who are jews by birth and not sinful gentiles
i’ll pour some of your water [into my water tube].
to watch in readiness to spear, as a fish.
astringent
heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
never be lacking in zeal, but keep your spiritual fervor, serving the lord.
even with these words, they had difficulty keeping the crowd from sacrificing to them.
just then a man came up to jesus and asked, “teacher, what good thing must i do to get eternal life?”
there were three gates on the east, three on the north, three on the south and three on the west.
the corn won’t sprout because the small ants are affecting it.
when the intensity of the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the throbbing pain.
the crowds that went ahead of him and those that followed shouted, “hosanna to the son of david!” “blessed is he who comes in the name of the lord!” “hosanna in the highest heaven!”
they sailed to the region of the gerasenes, which is across the lake from galilee.  when jesus stepped ashore, he was met by a demon-possessed man from the town. for a long time this man had not worn clothes or lived in a house, but had lived in the tombs.  when he saw jesus, he cried out and fell at his feet, shouting at the top of his voice, “what do you want with me, jesus, son of the most high god? i beg you, don’t torture me!”
correct
waken from a trance.
for the husband is the head of the wife as christ is the head of the church, his body, of which he is the savior.
if it bears fruit next year, fine! if not, then cut it down.' "
filled
the dead man sat up and began to talk, and jesus gave him back to his mother.
but i have nothing definite to write to his majesty about him. therefore i have brought him before all of you, and especially before you, king agrippa, so that as a result of this investigation i may have something to write.
if your stay is long, that is the meaning of an resident alien because you have joined in [with those people].
to lose permanent teeth
cut-down cogon grass.
i tell you, i will not drink from this fruit of the vine from now on until that day when i drink it new with you in my father’s kingdom.”
decrease in intensity
in the same way, the lord has commanded that those who preach the gospel should receive their living from the gospel.
then jesus said to his disciples, “truly i tell you, it is hard for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of heaven.
but if our unrighteousness brings out god’s righteousness more clearly, what shall we say? that god is unjust in bringing his wrath on us? (i am using a human argument.)
i’ll use your skirts temporarily.
for you know the grace of our lord jesus christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sake he became poor, so that you through his poverty might become rich.
when jesus had entered capernaum, a centurion came to him, asking for help.  “lord,” he said, “my servant lies at home paralyzed, suffering terribly.”
he asked for a writing tablet, and to everyone’s astonishment he wrote, “his name is john.”
when it is summer, the sunny, dry weather is long.
for there is nothing hidden that will not be disclosed, and nothing concealed that will not be known or brought out into the open.
lounge
“from others,” peter answered. “then the children are exempt,” jesus said to him.
with one voice they cried out, "away with this man! release barabbas to us!"
which is easier: to say, ‘your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘get up and walk’?
this is an illustration for the present time, indicating that the gifts and sacrifices being offered were not able to clear the conscience of the worshiper.
let’s eat now.
may the lord make your love increase and overflow for each other and for everyone else, just as ours does for you.
fill a basket
but his followers took him by night and lowered him in a basket through an opening in the wall.
jesus replied, “what is impossible with man is possible with god.”
therefore, i tell you, her many sins have been forgiven—as her great love has shown. but whoever has been forgiven little loves little.”
by examining him yourself, you will be able to learn the truth about all these charges we are bringing against him.”
so paul asked, “then what baptism did you receive?” “john’s baptism,” they replied.
the person who dances to the drum waves two pieces of material.
i’m not going to tell stories.
to leave behind in someone's care, especially of a child
the wet dog shakes the water off of his body.
“you unbelieving and perverse generation,” jesus replied, “how long shall i stay with you? how long shall i put up with you? bring the boy here to me.”
ten
to cut by repeatedly slashing
"meanwhile, the older son was in the field. when he came near the house, he heard music and dancing.
these are those who did not defile themselves with women, for they remained virgins. they follow the lamb wherever he goes. they were purchased from among mankind and offered as firstfruits to god and the lamb.
while jesus was still talking to the crowd, his mother and brothers stood outside, wanting to speak to him.
moses was educated in all the wisdom of the egyptians and was powerful in speech and action.
when the boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
"why does this fellow talk like that? he's blaspheming! who can forgive sins but god alone?"
scaffolding is the temporary structure on which we stand when we build the body of a house.
we cannot be freed unless we have been redeemed/ransomed. it comes from that which was used as a ransom.
to plant
perhaps the people were saying, “so then when john grows up, he/they ?? won’t move when john speaks.”
"you are a king, then!" said pilate. jesus answered, "you are right in saying i am a king. in fact, for this reason i was born, and for this i came into the world, to testify to the truth. everyone on the side of truth listens to me."
but a pharisee named gamaliel, a teacher of the law, who was honored by all the people, stood up in the sanhedrin and ordered that the men be put outside for a little while.
in this way, love is made complete among us so that we will have confidence on the day of judgment, because in this world we are like him.
bow
when everyone feels hurt, that is [the context where] they will be reconciled to one another. you hugged each other because you were reconciled
to scrape one’s body against something.
his divine power has given us everything we need for a godly life through our knowledge of him who called us by his own glory and goodness.
a village on the libogonan river between manikì and bulisung.
wrinkle
i, me (1st person singular)
“the reason my father loves me is that i lay down my life—only to take it up again.”
therefore, i will punish him and then release him."
then one of them, named caiaphas, who was high priest that year, spoke up, "you know nothing at all!
a crosswise piece, that is the body of a fish which is repeatedly chopped off.
rouse from sleep without becoming fully alert.
timothy, my son, i am giving you this command in keeping with the prophecies once made about you, so that by recalling them you may fight the battle well,
you have been set free from sin and have become slaves to righteousness.
poetic term for kiss
give proper recognition to those widows who are really in need.
for the unbelieving husband has been sanctified through his wife, and the unbelieving wife has been sanctified through her believing husband. otherwise your children would be unclean, but as it is, they are holy.
top of a shield
i know what i’ll do so that, when i lose my job here, people will welcome me into their houses.’
they took turns carrying the pig.
after many days had gone by, there was a conspiracy among the jews to kill him,
a kind of black, short, small-grained rice.
take something
tips of sweet potato plants
if anyone teaches otherwise and does not agree to the sound instruction of our lord jesus christ and to godly teaching,
correct
come across, encounter.
to clear field old rice plants, especially rice, to clear field for planting camotes.
but in the church i would rather speak five intelligible words to instruct others than ten thousand words in a tongue.
when you come, bring the cloak that i left with carpus at troas, and my scrolls, especially the parchments.
to those not having the law i became like one not having the law (though i am not free from god’s law but am under christ’s law), so as to win those not having the law.
banana blossom
a black shrimp.
move forward slowly
charm for catching pigs
lot
compete
rainbow.
dogs, when they are itching, they scratch with their feet.
i assure you before god that what i am writing you is no lie.
give, and it will be given to you. a good measure, pressed down, shaken together and running over, will be poured into your lap. for with the measure you use, it will be measured to you.”
when jesus came to the region of caesarea philippi, he asked his disciples, “who do people say the son of man is?”
when you come together, it is not the lord's supper you eat,
to one he gave five bags of gold, to another two bags, and to another one bag, each according to his ability. then he went on his journey.
to smooth out and flatten.
there was a newly married couple, and when the woman was in the beginning of pregnancy, she strongly craved the mango fruit and so she forced her spouse to get a mango for her. later, when it was already there, she was no longer hungry for it.
they answered him, "we are abraham's descendants and have never been slaves of anyone. how can you say that we shall be set free?"
my fellow prisoner aristarchus sends you his greetings, as does mark, the cousin of barnabas. (you have received instructions about him; if he comes to you, welcome him.)
jesus looked at them and said, "with man this is impossible, but not with god; all things are possible with god."
an herbal preparation to prevent conception
i do not understand what i do. for what i want to do i do not do, but what i hate i do.
to throw away.
circular growth of hair
"woe to you experts in the law, because you have taken away the key to knowledge. you yourselves have not entered, and you have hindered those who were entering."
tie string of a bolo.
the person who is rained on gets soaked by the rain when he gets wet.
that was the time they made an idol in the form of a calf. they brought sacrifices to it and reveled in what their own hands had made.
buliung will pole the raft with the old one.
a second time they summoned the man who had been blind. "give glory to god, " they said. "we know this man is a sinner."
“leave her alone,” jesus replied. “it was intended that she should save this perfume for the day of my burial.”
but all those who knew him, including the women who had followed him from galilee, stood at a distance, watching these things.
his house.
when we plant something such as seedlings, then we will do the planting carefully.
"all this i have told you so that you will not go astray.
honeycomb
the groom heeds the custom/warning; he returns to his mother [following the marriage ceremony].
look, your house is left to you desolate.
possible
what i said to the girl was, "let's go away for a period of time to test our feelings. we will make an agreement for one year or two years, and if your love doesn't transfer to another man, i will follow through to marry you."
pay
but mary treasured up all these things and pondered them in her heart.
instrument made from bamboo which is pointed and sharpened on both sides
strand
just one betelnut on a palm tree.
or take ships as an example. although they are so large and are driven by strong winds, they are steered by a very small rudder wherever the pilot wants to go.
stretch out to full length
he came to derbe and then to lystra, where a disciple named timothy lived, whose mother was a jewess and a believer, but whose father was a greek.
i, john, am the one who heard and saw these things. and when i had heard and seen them, i fell down to worship at the feet of the angel who had been showing them to me.
i still had no peace of mind, because i did not find my brother titus there. so i said goodbye to them and went on to macedonia.
they were startled and frightened, thinking they saw a ghost.
"when someone invites you to a wedding feast, do not take the place of honor, for a person more distinguished than you may have been invited.
nonpoisonous leaf used for putting on swellings and aches.
rise
how is it you don’t understand that i was not talking to you about bread? but be on your guard against the yeast of the pharisees and sadducees.”
story song
the moon is at its zenith.
the poor you will always have with you, and you can help them any time you want. but you will not always have me.
part
when she heard about jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak, because she thought, "if i just touch his clothes, i will be healed."
so that your daily life may win the respect of outsiders and so that you will not be dependent on anybody.
to push, as a drawer, bench, chair, table
to be put into effect when the times reach their fulfillment—to bring unity to all things in heaven and on earth under christ.
moan
the people stood watching, and the rulers even sneered at him. they said, "he saved others; let him save himself if he is the christ of god, the chosen one."
choke
we jump up and down when we ump repeatedly two or three times.
however, after his brothers had left for the festival, he went also, not publicly, but in secret.
give something as a token of appreciation
many people spread their cloaks on the road, while others spread branches they had cut in the fields.
arrow(s), or spear(s), [or] a spear trap are that which are used for hunting.
paul then stood up in the meeting of the areopagus and said: "men of athens! i see that in every way you are very religious.
agrippa said to festus, "this man could have been set free if he had not appealed to caesar."
dip up
to wrap something up in cloth.
rub between hands
miss someone
therefore, whoever eats the bread or drinks the cup of the lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of sinning against the body and blood of the lord.
when jesus had finished saying these things, the crowds were amazed at his teaching,  because he taught as one who had authority, and not as their teachers of the law.
how were you inferior to the other churches, except that i was never a burden to you? forgive me this wrong!
to stare
do something alone
cook by boiling
camote field
a channel, groove, or ditch.
let no one in the field go back to get their cloak.
rise! let us go! here comes my betrayer!”
a teeter-totter.
baguntaas is the halfway point between valencia and nasuli.
the second angel poured out his bowl on the sea, and it turned into blood like that of a dead person, and every living thing in the sea died.
the person who is making preparations to cut [his field] and has gotten six people as tomorrow he will carry out [his plan] to have [his field] cut
error
the person who feels badly, he will strengthen himself  so that he can endure the difficulty which he has encountered and then he will feel better
just as man is destined to die once, and after that to face judgment,
high-pitched
when people’s children are sick, they quickly get a chicken for the shaman to perform a wave offering.
just, only
and i confer on you a kingdom, just as my father conferred one on me,
carrying his own cross, he went out to the place of the skull (which in aramaic is called golgotha).
dizzy
we always carry around in our body the death of jesus, so that the life of jesus may also be revealed in our body.
he who has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says to the churches.
padded hips of a monkey
bamboo spear
among them were mary magdalene, mary the mother of james and joseph, and the mother of zebedee’s sons.
a large edible frog.
a woman divided her hair into two parts as she rolls her hair into two pompadours one on each side of her head.
these returned and reported it to the rest; but they did not believe them either.
the carabao which is pulling a cart as it hauls corn will experience difficulty if there are those who ride on it.
the reason utù is whispering to to his friend is so that his mother and father will not know that he will accompany his friend to go to manila.
so go to the street corners and invite to the banquet anyone you find.’
to make her holy, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word,
ginger
give to everyone who asks you, and if anyone takes what belongs to you, do not demand it back.
for we brought nothing into the world, and we can take nothing out of it.
but jesus asked him, "judas, are you betraying the son of man with a kiss?"
if there are those in a some village who are under [someone's] authority, it seems that they are all his subjects.
tip
a kind of thorny weed.
to leave behind (involuntarily)
clouds building up
when they received it, they began to grumble against the landowner.
obey.
but blessed are your eyes because they see, and your ears because they hear.
“truly i tell you,” jesus said to them, “no one who has left home or wife or brothers or sisters or parents or children for the sake of the kingdom of god
he went there to register with mary, who was pledged to be married to him and was expecting a child.
in the presence of god and of christ jesus, who will judge the living and the dead, and in view of his appearing and his kingdom, i give you this charge:
so then, my brothers, when you come together to eat, wait for each other.
if i have a problem, i am not afraid to ask for help.
river near the agusan davao boundary.
a bow
so then, if those who are not circumcised keep the law’s requirements, will they not be regarded as though they were circumcised?
the point of what we are saying is this: we do have such a high priest, who sat down at the right hand of the throne of the majesty in heaven,
(indeed, when gentiles, who do not have the law, do by nature things required by the law, they are a law for themselves, even though they do not have the law.
have a cold
do not let any unwholesome talk come out of your mouths, but only what is helpful for building others up according to their needs, that it may benefit those who listen.
the matchbox, its body was fitted together.
greet philologus, julia, nereus and his sister, and olympas and all the saints with them.
mock
a person who lacks good manners
oh, this wall which i had painted has been scratched!
huge
moddina’s husband.
this is an illustration for the present time, indicating that the gifts and sacrifices being offered were not able to clear the conscience of the worshiper.
her teeth are close together.
that day when evening came, he said to his disciples, "let us go over to the other side."
when they found him on the other side of the lake, they asked him, "rabbi, when did you get here?"
kind of bird weighing around 3 kilos
as a fair exchange—i speak as to my children—open wide your hearts also.
milk
become flavorless
be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving each other, just as in christ god forgave you.
when the perishable has been clothed with the imperishable, and the mortal with immortality, then the saying that is written will come true: "death has been swallowed up in victory."
shallow water hole in a creek or river crossing
and drank the same spiritual drink; for they drank from the spiritual rock that accompanied them, and that rock was christ.
they asked her, “woman, why are you crying?” “they have taken my lord away,” she said, “and i don’t know where they have put him.”
clarify it.
the ocean swells and ebbs
then a mighty angel picked up a boulder the size of a large millstone and threw it into the sea, and said: “with such violence the great city of babylon will be thrown down, never to be found again.
take
for those who exalt themselves will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted.
sea; ocean
jesus said, “you believe because i told you i saw you under the fig tree. you will see greater things than that.”
the arab knife is rarely used to cut a field because it is just strapped at the waist and worn when one travels in in case there would be an enemy.
for an old rooster to have developed long spurs.
it is written: " 'as surely as i live,' says the lord, 'every knee will bow before me; every tongue will confess to god.' "
for on account of him many of the jews were going over to jesus and believing in him.
the fifth sardonyx, the sixth carnelian, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, and the twelfth amethyst.
blind pharisee! first clean the inside of the cup and dish, and then the outside also will be clean.
the watching of the older monkeys is turned around because surprisingly it is their offspring, [the] baby monkey, which is the one to watch out for them.
as for the person who doesn't believe a warning that there are raiders, he will be ensnared by something bad because he will be murdered.
part
forty
smooth
i
i fear for you, that somehow i have wasted my efforts on you.
to lie curled up (applies to animals)
don’t you have a saying, ‘it’s still four months until harvest’? i tell you, open your eyes and look at the fields! they are ripe for harvest.
to the weak i became weak, to win the weak. i have become all things to all people so that by all possible means i might save some.
for we are taking pains to do what is right, not only in the eyes of the lord but also in the eyes of man.
female companion
if anyone's name was not found written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.
spirit dog said to bark at night
palm wood from palm trees
the man left his wife and four children. and now, he has abandoned his wife and children
the days will come upon you when your enemies will build an embankment against you and encircle you and hem you in on every side.
frustrated
the sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.
he, too, will drink of the wine of god's fury, which has been poured full strength into the cup of his wrath. he will be tormented with burning sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and of the lamb.
the gospel he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy scriptures
but not everyone possesses this knowledge. some people are still so accustomed to idols that when they eat sacrificial food they think of it as having been sacrificed to a god, and since their conscience is weak, it is defiled.
repeatedly
do something accurately
to hear
that one.
we were surprised at amutatoy, that he came visiting at midnight.
the child stopped when his mother called.
there is a house whose pattern is pretty.
ambush (children's game of raiders)
flame
the red rat was changed from a red flying squirrel.
lengthen
peter replied, “even if all fall away on account of you, i never will.”
a kind of large fish
wade through
check out
to make someone blind
dive
but since they could see the man who had been healed standing there with them, there was nothing they could say.
the headdress of the of the love bird is red but the extention [of the headdress] there at the back of its neck is green.
a flower which is closed has not yet opened.
grace, mercy and peace from god the father and from jesus christ, the father's son, will be with us in truth and love.
guavano
if the rain is a lot and then the inside of the boat fills up [with water], it will sink to the brim.
he also saw a poor widow put in two very small copper coins.
by advocating customs unlawful for us romans to accept or practice."
so he took him to the commander. the centurion said, "paul, the prisoner, sent for me and asked me to bring this young man to you because he has something to tell you."
a sticker such as a burr; something that sticks, such as adhesive tape
and if anyone takes words away from this book of prophecy, god will take away from him his share in the tree of life and in the holy city, which are described in this book.
if many get on a raft, it will become submerged just under the surface of the water.
when he opened the abyss, smoke rose from it like the smoke from a gigantic furnace. the sun and sky were darkened by the smoke from the abyss.
permit something to fully develop or mature
when he arrived at the other side in the region of the gadarenes, two demon-possessed men coming from the tombs met him. they were so violent that no one could pass that way.
it is easier for heaven and earth to disappear than for the least stroke of a pen to drop out of the law.
the king is familiar with these things, and i can speak freely to him. i am convinced that none of this has escaped his notice, because it was not done in a corner.
next month, i will borrow your land.
it becomes dark as the moon sets.
the power of the horses was in their mouths and in their tails; for their tails were like snakes, having heads with which they inflict injury.
skull.
all this is from god, who reconciled us to himself through christ and gave us the ministry of reconciliation:
when i saw her, i was greatly astonished. then the angel said to me: "why are you astonished? i will explain to you the mystery of the woman and of the beast she rides, which has the seven heads and ten horns.
the child who turns over on its stomach, scoots forward as it crawls.
they will throw them into the blazing furnace, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
wanting to release jesus, pilate appealed to them again.
please estimate [about how much we need] also for our breakfast. please.
for you have been born again, not of perishable seed, but of imperishable, through the living and enduring word of god.
don't you know that you yourselves are god's temple and that god's spirit lives in you?
in anger his master handed him over to the jailers to be tortured, until he should pay back all he owed.
that all of them may be one, father, just as you are in me and i am in you. may they also be in us so that the world may believe that you have sent me.
to find to be or to have become something.
"he committed no sin, and no deceit was found in his mouth."
we are fools for christ, but you are so wise in christ! we are weak, but you are strong! you are honored, we are dishonored!
dirtied with dirt.
correct answer to a riddle.
they were unable to trap him in what he had said there in public. and astonished by his answer, they became silent.
large yellow camote
in the same way, after supper he took the cup, saying, "this cup is the new covenant in my blood; do this, whenever you drink it, in remembrance of me."
the hard, intact outer shell of a dead palm tree left after the pulp has rotted out.
jesus asked, “were not all ten cleansed? where are the other nine?
my father, who has given them to me, is greater than all ; no one can snatch them out of my father's hand.
he came to simon peter, who said to him, “lord, are you going to wash my feet?”
notched pole used as ladder
when the moon comes up, our bodies are hit by the light of the moon, we have a shadow.
you, however, know all about my teaching, my way of life, my purpose, faith, patience, love, endurance,
grass
beat or whip.
"what do you want me to do for you?" jesus asked him. the blind man said, "rabbi, i want to see."
the sun will set.
when they did not find him, they went back to jerusalem to look for him.
as for that love charm, it is put around the arm or worn as a necklace.
born raider
to move about in all directions
it still remains that some will enter that rest, and those who formerly had the gospel preached to them did not go in, because of their disobedience.
the field is the world, and the good seed stands for the people of the kingdom. the weeds are the people of the evil one,
when jesus had finished saying all this to the people who were listening, he entered capernaum.
what then shall we say? that the gentiles, who did not pursue righteousness, have obtained it, a righteousness that is by faith;
"a little yeast works through the whole batch of dough."
used to help supply the bride price for another man’s son.
do you not know that he who unites himself with a prostitute is one with her in body? for it is said, “the two will become one flesh.”
jesus replied, "to be sure, elijah does come first, and restores all things. why then is it written that the son of man must suffer much and be rejected?
i suffered injury on an errand when i came across a murderer.
then he went out to the gateway, where another servant girl saw him and said to the people there, “this fellow was with jesus of nazareth.”
crow.
the law was brought in so that the trespass might increase. but where sin increased, grace increased all the more,
[some manuscripts include: but silas decided to remain there.]
drum made of hollowed-out tree covered with deerskin
to sing a lullaby
how can you be so confident!
these returned and reported it to the rest; but they did not believe them either.
steps to a porch or on a hillside
but that you may know that the son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins . . . ." he said to the paralytic, "i tell you, get up, take your mat and go home."
despise
fall apart
group of smaller stems
then a man named jairus, a synagogue leader, came and fell at jesus’ feet, pleading with him to come to his house
to draw towards oneself, hold on to, guard jealously as of newlyweds, children, food.
when?
soil, mud.
false,
sting
they all joined together constantly in prayer, along with the women and mary the mother of jesus, and with his brothers.
stuffy nose
when they came together in galilee, he said to them, “the son of man is going to be delivered into the hands of men.
from the sky huge hailstones of about a hundred pounds each fell upon men. and they cursed god on account of the plague of hail, because the plague was so terrible
chicken fight
but even the archangel michael, when he was disputing with the devil about the body of moses, did not dare to bring a slanderous accusation against him, but said, "the lord rebuke you!"
some pharisees came and tested him by asking, "is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?"
so he made a whip out of cords, and drove all from the temple courts, both sheep and cattle; he scattered the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.
squeeze tightly, hug
is any one of you in trouble? he should pray. is anyone happy? let him sing songs of praise.
saying, 'this fellow began to build and was not able to finish.'
i have seen and i testify that this is god’s chosen one.”
your
they totally destroy themselves. the only thing they give attention to is their own bad conduct.
the rats will propagate; it mated with another rat which was not the same as itself.
ashes come from fire when there is something that is being burned.
"i tell you the truth, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
therefore i urge you to imitate me.
small container
for by your words you will be acquitted, and by your words you will be condemned.”
rattan reinforcement on the bottom of a basket
the islanders showed us unusual kindness. they built a fire and welcomed us all because it was raining and cold.
making the most of every opportunity, because the days are evil.
“now get up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do.”
but when the sun came up, the plants were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
these are the twelve he appointed: simon (to whom he gave the name peter);
he told us how he had seen an angel appear in his house and say, ‘send to joppa for simon who is called peter.
fifty
but do not forget this one thing, dear friends: with the lord a day is like a thousand years, and a thousand years are like a day.
a third of mankind was killed by the three plagues of fire, smoke and sulfur that came out of their mouths.
retract
there’s a lot of this rice.
anyone who runs ahead and does not continue in the teaching of christ does not have god; whoever continues in the teaching has both the father and the son.
that day herod and pilate became friends--before this they had been enemies.
i fast twice a week and give a tenth of all i get.’
but every spirit that does not acknowledge jesus is not from god. this is the spirit of the antichrist, which you have heard is coming and even now is already in the world.
stay
to cure, remedy
for i tell you, you will not see me again until you say, ‘blessed is he who comes in the name of the lord.’”
john wore clothing made of camel's hair, with a leather belt around his waist, and he ate locusts and wild honey.
it’s stained already.
the person whose horse was confiscated for a debt, yelled with a loud yell, "why is it that i am the one from whom you take something for a debt when i have no debt to you?"
may their eyes be darkened so they cannot see, and their backs be bent forever.”
greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
let us therefore make every effort to do what leads to peace and to mutual edification.
stop bleeding
something stored up as valuable to that person; a treasure or a keepsake.
give up trying
a large herd of pigs was feeding on the nearby hillside.
when the demons came out of the man, they went into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and was drowned.
unhelpful
the very top of the head
i am not seeking glory for myself; but there is one who seeks it, and he is the judge.
huge
suffer injury or accident
the night before herod was to bring him to trial, peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and sentries stood guard at the entrance.
to run in different directions as boys do when playing basketball
have hiccoughs
when [an area] has been cut and [the trees] sprout again and after a long time the trees become old, it has become a secondary forest.
philip and bartholomew; thomas and matthew the tax collector; james son of alphaeus, and thaddaeus;
paul had decided to sail past ephesus to avoid spending time in the province of asia, for he was in a hurry to reach jerusalem, if possible, by the day of pentecost.
i’ll return in the future, about two years from now.
the horns on a carved bamboo comb.
that namu torch, it is what is used to release ??  the smoke so that the bees will be smoked and leave.
there is a person who has a snack of bread and he gets peanut [butter] which he spreads back and forth on it so that it will taste good
to expend great effort
when the thousand years are over, satan will be released from his prison
the spiritual man makes judgments about all things, but he himself is not subject to any man's judgment:
but christ is faithful as the son over god’s house. and we are his house, if indeed we hold firmly to our confidence and the hope in which we glory.
"then the lord said to me, 'go; i will send you far away to the gentiles.' "
a person would have to wonder
to make short, quick, side motions with a bolo on a flat surface
the spirit clearly says that in later times some will abandon the faith and follow deceiving spirits and things taught by demons.
i do not understand what i do. for what i want to do i do not do, but what i hate i do.
a large number of people followed him, including women who mourned and wailed for him.
for he "has put everything under his feet." now when it says that "everything" has been put under him, it is clear that this does not include god himself, who put everything under christ.
i, tertius, who wrote down this letter, greet you in the lord.
any kind of hole, if it can hold a lot, it is capacious.
crocodile
for this reason, ever since i heard about your faith in the lord jesus and your love for all god’s people,
peter asked, "lord, are you telling this parable to us, or to everyone?"
you must teach what is in accord with sound doctrine.
so give the order for the tomb to be made secure until the third day. otherwise, his disciples may come and steal the body and tell the people that he has been raised from the dead. this last deception will be worse than the first.”
"from childhood," he answered. "it has often thrown him into fire or water to kill him. but if you can do anything, take pity on us and help us."
the person whos legs are crippled, he scoots along as he moves along
a few days later king agrippa and bernice arrived at caesarea to pay their respects to festus.
and he said, “truly i tell you, unless you change and become like little children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
others replied, "no, he deceives the people." but no one would say anything publicly about him for fear of the jews.
strip
praise be to the god and father of our lord jesus christ! in his great mercy he has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of jesus christ from the dead,
an ulcer or sore with raised edges
to make an issue or accusation about something
to have chills
face of a person
swelling
when silas and timothy came from macedonia, paul devoted himself exclusively to preaching, testifying to the jews that jesus was the messiah.
when two days of this process has been completed, finally that agkud can be eaten.
jesus was in the centre of the throng.
thousand
now about virgins: i have no command from the lord, but i give a judgment as one who by the lord’s mercy is trustworthy.
he went away a second time and prayed, “my father, if it is not possible for this cup to be taken away unless i drink it, may your will be done.”
here there is no greek or jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, scythian, slave or free, but christ is all, and is in all.
metal hoe
a short, fat snake.
if a person who is jealous cannot steal, he will hate us and his view of us will be bad.
large cheeks.
i gave the pencil to asat.
to tie up by wrapping something around securely as many crabs or fish in a leaf
and so upon you will come all the righteous blood that has been shed on earth, from the blood of righteous abel to the blood of zechariah son of berekiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar.
the father loves the son and has placed everything in his hands.
when there are many grubs which are making a whispering noise, it lets us know that the [grubs] in the palm trunk have broken through [to each other] knotched palm.
to recover
i tell you the truth, he who believes has everlasting life.
“as the father has loved me, so have i loved you. now remain in my love.”
not fitting
i found that the accusation had to do with questions about their law, but there was no charge against him that deserved death or imprisonment.
one of them, an expert in the law, tested him with this question:
i found that the very commandment that was intended to bring life actually brought death.
"as for the person who hears my words but does not keep them, i do not judge him. for i did not come to judge the world, but to save it.
if there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
they came to him and said, "teacher, we know you are a man of integrity. you aren't swayed by men, because you pay no attention to who they are; but you teach the way of god in accordance with the truth. is it right to pay taxes to caesar or not?
abdomen
night and day, whether he sleeps or gets up, the seed sprouts and grows, though he does not know how.
one begins to make a basket. whatever kind of woven basket, that is the initial stage of weaving a basket.
are not all angels ministering spirits sent to serve those who will inherit salvation?
the older person will say, "get a chicken to waver to remove your bad luck."
and you, capernaum, will you be lifted to the heavens? no, you will go down to hades. for if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in sodom, it would have remained to this day.
converse, discuss.
and he said, "these are they who have come out of the great tribulation; they have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the lamb. therefore, "they are before the throne of god and serve him day and night in his temple; and he who sits on the throne will spread his tent over them.
delicious.
there is someone who will borrow rice from me
i will make a storage shelter for corn.
melt
and do not grumble, as some of them did—and were killed by the destroying angel.
he dealt treacherously with our people and oppressed our ancestors by forcing them to throw out their newborn babies so that they would die.
isn’t this the carpenter’s son? isn’t his mother’s name mary, and aren’t his brothers james, joseph, simon and judas?
the churches in the province of asia send you greetings. aquila and priscilla greet you warmly in the lord, and so does the church that meets at their house.
you have not come to a mountain that can be touched and that is burning with fire; to darkness, gloom and storm;
‘after this i will return and rebuild david’s fallen tent. its ruins i will rebuild, and i will restore it,
"that servant who knows his master's will and does not get ready or does not do what his master wants will be beaten with many blows.
to tuck in (clothes)
where he stayed until the death of herod. and so was fulfilled what the lord had said through the prophet: “out of egypt i called my son.”
a large, monkey-eating eagle.
when they came to the crowd, a man approached jesus and knelt before him.
give money or clothing on credit to someone who probably won’t pay for it.
have i now become your enemy by telling you the truth?
for it seems to me that god has put us apostles on display at the end of the procession, like those condemned to die in the arena. we have been made a spectacle to the whole universe, to angels as well as to human beings.
at that time the son born according to the flesh persecuted the son born by the power of the spirit. it is the same now.
some have departed from these and have turned to meaningless talk.
aware of their discussion, jesus asked them: "why are you talking about having no bread? do you still not see or understand? are your hearts hardened?
to wear a sarong loosely draped over the shoulders as a protection from the cold.
near the speaker
some time later paul said to barnabas, “let us go back and visit the believers in all the towns where we preached the word of the lord and see how they are doing.”
you are observing special days and months and seasons and years!
therefore the pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. “he put mud on my eyes,” the man replied, “and i washed, and now i see.”
decrease, as temperature or blood pressure
"behold, i am coming soon! blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy in this book."
to smooth out and flatten.
if people do not welcome you, leave their town and shake the dust off your feet as a testimony against them.”
get repeatedly or thoroughly lost
the rest were killed with the sword coming out of the mouth of the rider on the horse, and all the birds gorged themselves on their flesh.
overtake
then some of our companions went to the tomb and found it just as the women had said, but him they did not see."
he called a little child to him, and placed the child among them.
everything which lives, all of us here on earth die.
cloudy and drizzly weather that promotes mushroom growth
inside
the back
to sneeze
by faith in the name of jesus, this man whom you see and know was made strong. it is jesus’ name and the faith that comes through him that has completely healed him, as you can all see.
sound of an airplane or bamboo
there is a lot of dust when there are many vehicles which pass by on the road that is not cemented.
i had not expected that i would be able to teach the father and the daughter (lit. offspring).
to ascend.
while a large crowd was gathering and people were coming to jesus from town after town, he told this parable:
the grace of the lord jesus christ be with your spirit. amen.
forbid
one sabbath jesus was going through the grainfields, and his disciples began to pick some heads of grain, rub them in their hands and eat the kernels.
timothy, my son, i am giving you this command in keeping with the prophecies once made about you, so that by recalling them you may fight the battle well,
hair bangs.
the offspring of the beetles are the alibutod, katod, and langgi-on grubs.
if he let it go, he intended to release the dog.
strain
but these are written that you may believe that jesus is the christ, the son of god, and that by believing you may have life in his name.
we have a small child [whose] age is about one year.
breach
for god has bound all men over to disobedience so that he may have mercy on them all.
wicked (used as a derogatory term for a child)
but seek his kingdom, and these things will be given to you as well.
tell
but, “let the one who boasts boast in the lord.”
true, correct; to verify or witness something as true; to use something as a guarantee.
half
asking
a man was there by the name of zacchaeus; he was a chief tax collector and was wealthy.
for if you live according to the flesh, you will die; but if by the spirit you put to death the misdeeds of the body, you will live.
there was a person who was sawing togop wood into boards.
long-necked, two-stringed musical instrument
feed
first, they pound the tabacco with a small piece of wood. when it has become smooth, they transfer it to a small mortar and then they pound it there with a pestle.
"yes, lord," she replied, "but even the dogs under the table eat the children's crumbs.
surround
don't test your mother because it's bad.
a light for revelation to the gentiles, and the glory of your people israel.”
so that no one would be unsettled by these trials. for you know quite well that we are destined for them.
stop
the adolescent frog is becoming almost the same size as the mother in size.
produce fruit in keeping with repentance. and do not begin to say to yourselves, ‘we have abraham as our father.’ for i tell you that out of these stones god can raise up children for abraham.
there were six people who went hunting with a weapon.
here were [some] people who were putting shelled corn in a sack and they were packing it down with a pestle to compress it so that the corn would be tightly compressed in the sack.
by no means! we are those who have died to sin; how can we live in it any longer?
leaving the next day, we reached caesarea and stayed at the house of philip the evangelist, one of the seven.
be intensely thirsty
i tell you, he will see that they get justice, and quickly. however, when the son of man comes, will he find faith on the earth?”
what does scripture say? “abraham believed god, and it was credited to him as righteousness.”
a kind of breadfruit
but each in his own turn: christ, the firstfruits; then, when he comes, those who belong to him.
as for armed bands long ago, they were bad because they massacred those who had no fault.
but whoever drinks the water i give them will never thirst. indeed, the water i give them will become in them a spring of water welling up to eternal life.”
after three months we put out to sea in a ship that had wintered in the island. it was an alexandrian ship with the figurehead of the twin gods castor and pollux.
the pattern formed during the initial stage of weaving a basket.
to be haunted or made ill by an evil spirit
end or limit
black
mother's cut camote stems are gathered together which she will use to plant sweet potatoes tomorrow.
clamshell, clam.
grey
from there we traveled to philippi, a roman colony and the leading city of that district of macedonia. and we stayed there several days.
“if you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? even sinners love those who love them.
eyelashes.
flee the evil desires of youth, and pursue righteousness, faith, love and peace, along with those who call on the lord out of a pure heart.
entire hand, up to the wrist
for if, by the trespass of the one man, death reigned through that one man, how much more will those who receive god’s abundant provision of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man, jesus christ!
sell your possessions and give to the poor. provide purses for yourselves that will not wear out, a treasure in heaven that will not be exhausted, where no thief comes near and no moth destroys.
we have much to say about this, but it is hard to make it clear to you because you no longer try to understand.
we’re hungry for fresh rice but it’s a long time yet before harvest.
place or put
thin flakes, as of skin, or from eyes
so you also, when you have done everything you were told to do, should say, ‘we are unworthy servants; we have only done our duty.’”
a wide grin, grimace, or smile.
squeeze tightly, hug
for there are many rebellious people, mere talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision group.
i ask you, therefore, not to be discouraged because of my sufferings for you, which are your glory.
when his accusers got up to speak, they did not charge him with any of the crimes i had expected.
part of certain traps released by the trigger.
and saying, "it is true! the lord has risen and has appeared to simon."
many, as of a wriggling mass
to set on eggs.
kind of taro with red stalks
how dreadful it will be in those days for pregnant women and nursing mothers! there will be great distress in the land and wrath against this people.
then jacob went down to egypt, where he and our ancestors died.
for my eyes have seen your salvation,
no, a man is a jew if he is one inwardly; and circumcision is circumcision of the heart, by the spirit, not by the written code. such a man's praise is not from men, but from god.
you say, 'i am rich; i have acquired wealth and do not need a thing.' but you do not realize that you are wretched, pitiful, poor, blind and naked.
leafy plant
the guards were so afraid of him that they shook and became like dead men.
a large 2-string instrument like a kuglung
the meaning was jumbled when there were words which don't fit.
and this is his command: to believe in the name of his son, jesus christ, and to love one another as he commanded us.
"here is a boy with five small barley loaves and two small fish, but how far will they go among so many?"
slice or strip mat material.
to be very thin
they found the stone rolled away from the tomb,
teacher
the grace of the lord jesus be with you.
ravelling, as from material or thread unwound from a spool
for i have five brothers. let him warn them, so that they will not also come to this place of torment.’
cook
tungonu is the oldest, after him comes dusing's mother, after dusing's mother comes luluy's mother.
black dog
guests arriving at mealtime and being invited to eat
now, just now
squeeze a fistful of something
the rain chastened us.
if we experience swelling that has not yet burst, our lymph nodes here in our groin will hurt.
at the time that [she] fell, it was five o’clock in the afternoon.
the cat is spoiled because it is used to eating sardines.
when the men had hoisted it aboard, they passed ropes under the ship itself to hold it together. fearing that they would run aground on the sandbars of syrtis, they lowered the sea anchor and let the ship be driven along.
and no one after drinking old wine wants the new, for he says, 'the old is better.' "
and then the third married her, and in the same way the seven died, leaving no children.
dust
hard, as wood.
carabao
“woe to you, chorazin! woe to you, bethsaida! for if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in tyre and sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
a multiple-pronged spear.
do not let anyone who delights in false humility and the worship of angels disqualify you for the prize. such a person goes into great detail about what he has seen, and his unspiritual mind puffs him up with idle notions.
we'll be cursed for wasting the rice.
but we have this treasure in jars of clay to show that this all-surpassing power is from god and not from us.
you, dear children, are from god and have overcome them, because the one who is in you is greater than the one who is in the world.
love the lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind and with all your strength.'
god raised him from the dead so that he will never be subject to decay. as god has said, ‘i will give you the holy and sure blessings promised to david.’
if any woman who is a believer has widows in her family, she should help them and not let the church be burdened with them, so that the church can help those widows who are really in need.
see that you do not despise one of these little ones. for i tell you that their angels in heaven always see the face of my father in heaven.
a dark brown cockroach which may become quite large.
even some of the officials of the province, friends of paul, sent him a message begging him not to venture into the theater.
“but what about you?” he asked. “who do you say i am?” peter answered, “god’s messiah.”
small, tiny
middle, or center
lay one’s head on something
to whisper to each other.
accuse or blame someone
eggbeater
if i have made a deposit on a carabao calf but i cannot follow through to pay for it, the money i paid to hold it will not be returned because it will be forfeited.
i'm going to move to another location.
play tag
yet i am writing you a new command; its truth is seen in him and you, because the darkness is passing and the true light is already shining.
deliver weak, ineffective blows
cage or pen for animals
small knife or dagger
to pick a tree to cut down the fruit
halfway.
trap
immediately jesus reached out his hand and caught him. “you of little faith,” he said, “why did you doubt?”
what advantage, then, is there in being a jew, or what value is there in circumcision?
small green parrot with an aqua blue head
and we, who with unveiled faces all reflect the lord's glory, are being transformed into his likeness with everincreasing glory, which comes from the lord, who is the spirit.
so he ordered that they be baptized in the name of jesus christ. then they asked peter to stay with them for a few days.
ritual performed to remove a charm
"for who has known the mind of the lord that he may instruct him?" but we have the mind of christ.
morally bad
then the kings of the earth, the princes, the generals, the rich, the mighty, and every slave and every free man hid in caves and among the rocks of the mountains.
squeeze
see, i have told you ahead of time.
but she had her extra finger here.
filthy
infected teeth from not brushing
grow
i, john, am the one who heard and saw these things. and when i had heard and seen them, i fell down to worship at the feet of the angel who had been showing them to me.
we miss, are cold, for our companion when it has been a long time since we have seen each other. it means we are lonely.
when we make a deposit on something, we give a piece of material as a deposit to reserve a piglet.
then it says, ‘i will return to the house i left.’ when it arrives, it finds the house unoccupied, swept clean and put in order.
for true and just are his judgments. he has condemned the great prostitute who corrupted the earth by her adulteries. he has avenged on her the blood of his servants.”
fall apart
type of tulaang
he is always tossing and turning because his pain is excessive.
but because of your stubbornness and your unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath against yourself for the day of god’s wrath, when his righteous judgment will be revealed.
the law was brought in so that the trespass might increase. but where sin increased, grace increased all the more,
endure hardship with us like a good soldier of christ jesus.
there are six stitches in my gums. each one was knotted.
that has come to you. in the same way, the gospel is bearing fruit and growing throughout the whole world—just as it has been doing among you since the day you heard it and truly understood god’s grace.
(as he said through his holy prophets of long ago),
stalk of bananas
chocolate brown chicken
then he turned toward the woman and said to simon, “do you see this woman? i came into your house. you did not give me any water for my feet, but she wet my feet with her tears and wiped them with her hair.
if the ground is on a downward incline, the water will flow.
fine toothed comb
nauseated
kind of hard bamboo
with many similar parables jesus spoke the word to them, as much as they could understand.
the person who is first to speak, that is the one who initiates the discussion.
in the same way, was not even rahab the prostitute considered righteous for what she did when she gave lodging to the spies and sent them off in a different direction?
kind of red rice.
i also want the women to dress modestly, with decency and propriety, adorning themselves, not with elaborate hairstyles or gold or pearls or expensive clothes,
if we have one girl offspring, we will present her to her paternal grandparents.
then he released barabbas to them. but he had jesus flogged, and handed him over to be crucified.
the fruit of the lansones which are thick are clustered together.
then jesus said, "did i not tell you that if you believed, you would see the glory of god?"
as for everyone who comes to me and hears my words and puts them into practice, i will show you what they are like.  they are like a man building a house, who dug down deep and laid the foundation on rock. when a flood came, the torrent struck that house but could not shake it, because it was well built.
for the pagan world runs after all such things, and your father knows that you need them.
"i have told you these things, so that in me you may have peace. in this world you will have trouble. but take heart! i have overcome the world."
" 'well done, my good servant!' his master replied. 'because you have been trustworthy in a very small matter, take charge of ten cities.'
for this reason i have asked to see you and talk with you. it is because of the hope of israel that i am bound with this chain."
even if it isn't our companion who has died if we empathize with their sorrow by weeping.
they had peter and john brought before them and began to question them: “by what power or what name did you do this?”
everyone who heard this wondered about it, asking, “what then is this child going to be?” for the lord’s hand was with him.
show respect for someone who has died by being present at a wake.
as for that saw, it was a year before it returned to me because it ended up in kapugi.
chain
pain
when this man heard that jesus had arrived in galilee from judea, he went to him and begged him to come and heal his son, who was close to death.
they had as king over them the angel of the abyss, whose name in hebrew is abaddon, and in greek, apollyon.
the reason for our slowness to purchase the axe is because we will examine it like to see if it has a crack.
to echo, as a sound.
on no day will its gates ever be shut, for there will be no night there.
then the king told the attendants, ‘tie him hand and foot, and throw him outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
for it is time for judgment to begin with the family of god; and if it begins with us, what will the outcome be for those who do not obey the gospel of god?
he did not say anything to them without using a parable. but when he was alone with his own disciples, he explained everything.
to smother
dear children, let us not love with words or tongue but with actions and in truth.
when we look in a mirror, we see our reflection.
fast
a person would have to wonder
wrinkle
[the moon] is coming to its zenith.
cassava
when they asked him to spend more time with them, he declined.
aim one’s fist at the direction from which a dove calls.
(yes, i also baptized the household of stephanas; beyond that, i don't remember if i baptized anyone else.)
others that elijah had appeared, and still others that one of the prophets of long ago had come back to life.
i tell you, though he will not get up and give him the bread because he is his friend, yet because of the man's boldness he will get up and give him as much as he needs.
do not be surprised, my brothers, if the world hates you.
if they don't have property  [then] they are aliens.
it would be better for them to be thrown into the sea with a millstone tied around their neck than to cause one of these little ones to stumble.
there is a tarp which was used as a cap for ena's house.
it is being unfolded.
engagement feast
musical instrument made of la-ak bamboo, and open in one end;
groin
if you declare with your mouth, “jesus is lord,” and believe in your heart that god raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
waken from a trance.
bandiling is sobbing
the promise is for you and your children and for all who are far off—for all whom the lord our god will call.”
[as for] the old person, he is unable to get around as he walks because his knees are hurt ing.
he got into the boat with his disciples and went to the region of dalmanutha.
the son of matthat, the son of levi, the son of melki, the son of jannai, the son of joseph,
you know the commandments: ‘you shall not commit adultery, you shall not murder, you shall not steal, you shall not give false testimony, honor your father and mother.’”
tobacco
i am sending him--who is my very heart--back to you.
nor thieves nor the greedy nor drunkards nor slanderers nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of god.
pebbly or bumpy surface
dible greens.
some time ago when i was still a child, i had an ailment called alap-ap but i cured it with the plant kapigsula which grows on the beach.
sand from beach.
apply a liquid to the hair
when they had gone, an angel of the lord appeared to joseph in a dream. “get up,” he said, “take the child and his mother and escape to egypt. stay there until i tell you, for herod is going to search for the child to kill him.”
shake
heat water
when it is summer, the sunny, dry weather is long.
but the subjects of the kingdom will be thrown outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”
who then is the one who condemns? no one. christ jesus who died—more than that, who was raised to life—is at the right hand of god and is also interceding for us.
after this, jesus traveled about from one town and village to another, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of god. the twelve were with him,
i write to you, fathers, because you have known him who is from the beginning. i write to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one. i write to you, dear children, because you have known the father.
to be ambushed
in the time of herod king of judea there was a priest named zechariah, who belonged to the priestly division of abijah; his wife elizabeth was also a descendant of aaron.
very early in the morning, the chief priests, with the elders, the teachers of the law and the whole sanhedrin, reached a decision. they bound jesus, led him away and handed him over to pilate.
tie up in a bundle.
home owners or family of owner.
become reddish
how? what? in what manner?
fertilized but underdeveloped egg (spoiled before hatching)
much in every way! first of all, the jews have been entrusted with the very words of god.
to punch, hit with base of fist
“i am the vine; you are the branches. if you remain in me and i in you, you will bear much fruit; apart from me you can do nothing.”
good character
when we catch large fish, we just  roast some until partially cooked so that it will become stiff and not be wasted.
soggy, mushy, sticky
confront.
"when the counselor comes, whom i will send to you from the father, the spirit of truth who goes out from the father, he will testify about me.
no, not
hang around
the woman didn't expect that those words of her male-companion would be fulfilled that he would return on that day.
in the time of herod king of judea there was a priest named zechariah, who belonged to the priestly division of abijah; his wife elizabeth was also a descendant of aaron.
spine of a leaf
keep your lives free from the love of money and be content with what you have, because god has said, "never will i leave you; never will i forsake you."
i have been claimed by that person; he regards me as his younger brother.
“the merchants of the earth will weep and mourn over her because no one buys their cargoes anymore—
cartilage appendage to ribs
connect
if we are in despair, even if there is someone to resolve [the person's] feelings, his/her feelings won't be resolved and he/she will think of killing himself/herself
i was not able to restrain my anger at that person.
a huge fish or long teeth
“what are we going to do with these men?” they asked. “everyone living in jerusalem knows they have performed a notable sign, and we cannot deny it.
whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
he threw himself at jesus’ feet and thanked him—and he was a samaritan.
one who engages in necromancy
the revelation from jesus christ, which god gave him to show his servants what must soon take place. he made it known by sending his angel to his servant john,
you didn’t put your things in order.
then jesus went through the towns and villages, teaching as he made his way to jerusalem.
as for your old attitudes , don't add them onto  your new attitudes
really
one (used in counting)
soft soil.
it was the third hour when they crucified him.
a bird that talks at night
crazy
then they went home and prepared spices and perfumes. but they rested on the sabbath in obedience to the commandment.
if an illness comes to some place, [and] if someone visits from that place, the illness will be transmitted to us.
purchase transaction
a kind of red rice.
jesus replied, “and why do you break the command of god for the sake of your tradition?
if our companion does not pay attention to us, he is letting us know that we are not closely related to him.
a fungal skin disease (double-skin)
the sky receded like a scroll, rolling up, and every mountain and island was removed from its place.
“while i was with them, i protected them and kept them safe by that name you gave me. none has been lost except the one doomed to destruction so that scripture would be fulfilled.”
use it for making the hearth.
as john’s disciples were leaving, jesus began to speak to the crowd about john: “what did you go out into the wilderness to see? a reed swayed by the wind?
“this is the meaning of the parable: the seed is the word of god.
soft, spongy core
have a miscarriage
but i want you to know that the son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins.” so he said to the paralyzed man, “i tell you, get up, take your mat and go home.”
do your best to present yourself to god as one approved, a workman who does not need to be ashamed and who correctly handles the word of truth.
let me have a bolo on credit.
the son is the radiance of god’s glory and the exact representation of his being, sustaining all things by his powerful word. after he had provided purification for sins, he sat down at the right hand of the majesty in heaven.
while they were stoning him, stephen prayed, “lord jesus, receive my spirit.”
skin an animal, peel a fruit or vegetable
but as for you, continue in what you have learned and have become convinced of, because you know those from whom you learned it,
so i sent for you immediately, and it was good of you to come. now we are all here in the presence of god to listen to everything the lord has commanded you to tell us.”
"consider carefully what you hear," he continued. "with the measure you use, it will be measured to you--and even more
jesus answered, "the work of god is this: to believe in the one he has sent."
lie around
then herod called the magi secretly and found out from them the exact time the star had appeared.
person’s chest.
for the wisdom of this world is foolishness in god's sight. as it is written: "he catches the wise in their craftiness" ;
then the master called the servant in. ‘you wicked servant,’ he said, ‘i canceled all that debt of yours because you begged me to.
come here
he said, “throw your net on the right side of the boat and you will find some.” when they did, they were unable to haul the net in because of the large number of fish.
when we are holding a child in our arms and he lets his back bend back, the child is leaning back and over [against one's arms].
don’t we have the right to take a believing wife along with us, as do the other apostles and the lord’s brothers and cephas?
surely he says this for us, doesn’t he? yes, this was written for us, because whoever plows and threshes should be able to do so in the hope of sharing in the harvest.
they said to the woman, “we no longer believe just because of what you said; now we have heard for ourselves, and we know that this man really is the savior of the world.”
he spread out the scattered stones as he arranged them because he raked them.
lisanta’s mother is complimented because she doesn’t misbehave.
chose to stand rather than sit when talking.
there is a person who wants to buy a fish trap. he will ask, “maybe it is ok with you (lit. suitable to your breath) if i trade a chicken for it?”
"the son said to him, 'father, i have sinned against heaven and against you. i am no longer worthy to be called your son. '
grandparent
“when the kings of the earth who committed adultery with her and shared her luxury see the smoke of her burning, they will weep and mourn over her.
‘i will not,’ he answered, but later he changed his mind and went.
the girl bit her brother's index finger.
“i no longer call you servants, because a servant does not know his master’s business. instead, i have called you friends, for everything that i learned from my father i have made known to you.”
so pilate came out to them and asked, "what charges are you bringing against this man?
after the discussion, the wedding is begun. that is the decision that they get married.
submit yourselves for the lord's sake to every authority instituted among men: whether to the king, as the supreme authority,
“very truly i tell you, no servant is greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him.”
cluster
guarantee
experience
and over all these virtues put on love, which binds them all together in perfect unity.
now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: “the one i kiss is the man; arrest him.”
the person who has something that is making him feel badly, he will strengthen himself so that he can endure the difficulty which he has encountered.
and they cannot prove to you the charges they are now making against me.
to feel a girl’s breast.
the tenants seized his servants; they beat one, killed another, and stoned a third.
then seizing him, they led him away and took him into the house of the high priest. peter followed at a distance.
a bruised reed he will not break, and a smoldering wick he will not snuff out, till he has brought justice through to victory.
for it is not those who hear the law who are righteous in god’s sight, but it is those who obey the law who will be declared righteous.
we know that the law is good if one uses it properly.
slingshot made of abaca fiber
while jesus was having dinner at levi's house, many tax collectors and "sinners" were eating with him and his disciples, for there were many who followed him.
low platform around inside of house where people sit or sleep
part of
tangled
while the pharisees were gathered together, jesus asked them,
for i myself am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. i tell this one, ‘go,’ and he goes; and that one, ‘come,’ and he comes. i say to my servant, ‘do this,’ and he does it.”
they called to the mountains and the rocks, "fall on us and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne and from the wrath of the lamb!
sacrifice a pig when fasting
"then the owner of the vineyard said, 'what shall i do? i will send my son, 1555 whom i love; perhaps they will respect him.'
large water heron or bittern
this is the bread that came down from heaven. your forefathers ate manna and died, but he who feeds on this bread will live forever."
will take your horse ahead of time and then the next day you will just go to my house and inquire whether i have something to use for payment.
guests arriving at mealtime and being invited to eat
mother is frustrated with her field because her rice has many weeds.
the fishing basket is that in which the catch of fish, etc, is placed.
when the sunshine began, that was that which caused the field to dry to a crisp.
having no mother
"you must be on your guard. you will be handed over to the local councils and flogged in the synagogues. on account of me you will stand before governors and kings as witnesses to them.
if anyone does not provide for his relatives, and especially for his immediate family, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever
likewise, the bulanbulan “artificial moon” plant glows when it is dark. it’s flowers are bright.
international war
the shell and membrane of an egg
at that, paul left the council.
lean over
about eight days after jesus said this, he took peter, john and james with him and went up onto a mountain to pray.
then the jews began to argue sharply among themselves, "how can this man give us his flesh to eat?"
dog
so do not throw away your confidence; it will be richly rewarded.
stop
i assure you before god that what i am writing you is no lie.
crocodiles bite by snapping.
continue
when his parents saw him, they were astonished. his mother said to him, “son, why have you treated us like this? your father and i have been anxiously searching for you.”
the son of jesse, the son of obed, the son of boaz, the son of salmon, the son of nahshon,
when the voice had spoken, they found that jesus was alone. the disciples kept this to themselves and did not tell anyone at that time what they had seen.
i'll express [something] because here’s something i’d like to have from you.
moses writes this about the righteousness that is by the law: “the person who does these things will live by them.”
all that is left
the meaning of the sun being mid-way (lit. ear position), is that the sun is as high as one’s ear as it shines.
but they did not understand what he meant and were afraid to ask him about it.
the man who eats everything must not look down on him who does not, and the man who does not eat everything must not condemn the man who does, for god has accepted him.
the movement or quaking of an earthquake
for i can testify about them that they are zealous for god, but their zeal is not based on knowledge.
it takes us a long time to arrive because we have to detour .
he had to turn around and go back.
stick
“if i testify about myself, my testimony is not true.
take something
teach the older men to be temperate, worthy of respect, self-controlled, and sound in faith, in love and in endurance.
raise eyebrows as a signal
mud, found on riverbanks
their two stomachs were touching (lit. kissing) each other.
put your things together; they’ll get lost.
after festus had conferred with his council, he declared: "you have appealed to caesar. to caesar you will go!"
who then is the one who condemns? no one. christ jesus who died—more than that, who was raised to life—is at the right hand of god and is also interceding for us.
finish doing
base of a slope; foot of a mountain
?
to slap
overtake
she happens to come when we’re eating.
and to put on the new self, created to be like god in true righteousness and holiness.
the woman is carrying her water pole on her shoulder.
then jesus' disciples said, "now you are speaking clearly and without figures of speech.
shake water from hands.
abraham reasoned that god could raise the dead, and figuratively speaking, he did receive isaac back from death.
and repentance and forgiveness of sins will be preached in his name to all nations, beginning at jerusalem.
shared with; we are given a share.
the son of jacob, the son of isaac, the son of abraham, the son of terah, the son of nahor,
and goes home. then he calls his friends and neighbors together and says, 'rejoice with me; i have found my lost sheep.'
if it takes a long time for you to give birth, someone will say, “goodness, you are having a hard time [delivering a baby].”
during those days men will seek death, but will not find it; they will long to die, but death will elude them.
when she heard about jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak, because she thought, "if i just touch his clothes, i will be healed."
“we are witnesses of everything he did in the country of the jews and in jerusalem. they killed him by hanging him on a cross,
be strong to pull [on the saw] so that you will learn so that you will know how to saw.
people were overwhelmed with amazement. "he has done everything well," they said. "he even makes the deaf hear and the mute speak."
and the people went out to see what had happened. when they came to jesus, they found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting at jesus’ feet, dressed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
and repentance and forgiveness of sins will be preached in his name to all nations, beginning at jerusalem.
then they gathered around him and asked him, “lord, are you at this time going to restore the kingdom to israel?”
use a substitute name for an in-law
ladder
to push, pull or ride a water craft upriver against the current
mix together
kind of millet
god thus confirming our testimony about christ among you.
but sin, seizing the opportunity afforded by the commandment, produced in me every kind of coveting. for apart from the law, sin was dead.
i, paul, write this greeting in my own hand, which is the distinguishing mark in all my letters. this is how i write.
as the high priest and all the council can themselves testify. i even obtained letters from them to their associates in damascus and went there to bring these people as prisoners to jerusalem to be punished.
furry stemmed and leafed tree.
for sin, seizing the opportunity afforded by the commandment, deceived me, and through the commandment put me to death.
going to pilate, he asked for jesus’ body, and pilate ordered that it be given to him.
they kept looking for jesus, and as they stood in the temple area they asked one another, "what do you think? isn't he coming to the feast at all?"
biting worm
return, turn back
those who think they know something do not yet know as they ought to know.
once more he went away and prayed the same thing.
they will use speech that hits the mark. it will establish the truth of the matter. the person cannot answer back.
but god gives it a body as he has determined, and to each kind of seed he gives its own body.
hungry for fresh rice
but i tell you that anyone who is angry with a brother or sister will be subject to judgment. again, anyone who says to a brother or sister, ‘raca,’ is answerable to the court. and anyone who says, ‘you fool!’ will be in danger of the fire of hell.
we do not want you to be uninformed, brothers and sisters, about the troubles we experienced in the province of asia. we were under great pressure, far beyond our ability to endure, so that we despaired of life itself.
we put in at syracuse and stayed there three days.
the rain came down, the streams rose, and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it fell with a great crash.
sharpen with a knife
“they will say, ‘the fruit you longed for is gone from you. all your luxury and splendor have vanished, never to be recovered.’
jesus said, "i am with you for only a short time, and then i go to the one who sent me.
she involuntarily cried out because the throbbing pain hurt excessively as her body was smashed.
while they were worshiping the lord and fasting, the holy spirit said, “set apart for me barnabas and saul for the work to which i have called them.”
to cheep.
i write to you, dear children, because your sins have been forgiven on account of his name.
when there is a tree which moves there in the rapids that is a tree that is moved by the current.
which god will bring about in his own time—god, the blessed and only ruler, the king of kings and lord of lords,
when the sweet potato field has become old, we remove the old sweet potato vines and then we allow the sweet potatoes to grow back as they sprout new sweet potato vines.
to obey
roof poles
as for people long ago, they weren't able to play because they would be quick to demand retribution and then would ask for a large settlement.
every day.
unseasoned (as wood)
the things that mark an apostle--signs, wonders and miracles--were done among you with great perseverance.
a tan-colored, lacy-like edible fungus
speckled tick
rectangular woven container used for carrying lunch or items
if the limestone rock is pounded into a powder it can be used as lime.
cheer in praise, as at a game or cockfight
dew, moisture
to hide behind tree/bush
you foolish galatians! who has bewitched you? before your very eyes jesus christ was clearly portrayed as crucified.
so i went to the angel and asked him to give me the little scroll. he said to me, “take it and eat it. it will turn your stomach sour, but ‘in your mouth it will be as sweet as honey.’”
weave walls of bamboo.
harvest
distance
field full of sugarcane in full growth
basket, square or round basket with lid
“about righteousness, because i am going to the father, where you can see me no longer;”
ripe
to be made or given a position.
we felt his foot.
swim or float downriver with the current
he who overcomes will inherit all this, and i will be his god and he will be my son.
for i am with you, and no one is going to attack and harm you, because i have many people in this city.”
when we are frying something and we put the meat [in the pan], the heat sears [the meat].
by calling this covenant "new," he has made the first one obsolete; and what is obsolete and aging will soon disappear.
when there are those traveling, we feel rushed as they are leaving.
bird
call evil upon someone by practicing sorcery.
conical-shaped fish trap made of smooth bamboo strips
to roll as a hoop.
for i myself am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. i tell this one, ‘go,’ and he goes; and that one, ‘come,’ and he comes. i say to my servant, ‘do this,’ and he does it.”
clustered or grouped together
he/she insulted [someone] because he had not yet
the thunder was
jesus replied, “the one who has dipped his hand into the bowl with me will betray me.
watch closely
to pick a tree to cut down the fruit
faint
and one thing more: prepare a guest room for me, because i hope to be restored to you in answer to your prayers.
thought; thinking
in addition to our own encouragement, we were especially delighted to see how happy titus was, because his spirit has been refreshed by all of you. i had boasted to him about you, and you have not embarrassed me. but just as everything we said to you was true, so our boasting about you to titus has proved to be true as well.
tarsier of mindanao
salmon the father of boaz, whose mother was rahab, boaz the father of obed, whose mother was ruth, obed the father of jesse,
on his robe and on his thigh he has this name written: king of kings and lord of lords.
far off
after one eats, one burps.
corner area of a house or room; to put away in a corner for safekeeping
the thick, black clouds are thunderheads. those will cause it to rain.
then herod called the magi secretly and found out from them the exact time the star had appeared.
decorated with twisted metal
open-front
ostracize someone
now jesus loved martha and her sister and lazarus.
for the creation waits in eager expectation for the children of god to be revealed.
as for a person exalting [himself], when in a discussion, he loudly brags and says, “my own name is that which is able to lift up our companion who is overwhelmed by (lit. drowning in) a problem.”
he went on: "what comes out of a man is what makes him 'unclean.'
for the father loves the son and shows him all he does. yes, and he will show him even greater works than these, so that you will be amazed.
for there are eunuchs who were born that way, and there are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by others—and there are those who choose to live like eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. the one who can accept this should accept it.”
the tongue also is a fire, a world of evil among the parts of the body. it corrupts the whole person, sets the whole course of his life on fire, and is itself set on fire by hell.
it's like a man going away: he leaves his house and puts his servants in charge, each with his assigned task, and tells the one at the door to keep watch.
do something accurately
horse or dog fight
six days before the passover, jesus came to bethany, where lazarus lived, whom jesus had raised from the dead.
at harvest time he sent a servant to the tenants to collect from them some of the fruit of the vineyard.
underdeveloped egg (chick didn't hatch)
to sniff at one's cheek
stubby-tailed animal
for every house is built by someone, but god is the builder of everything.
fan a fire to make it burn hotter
pack to go
the rain dripped through on the rice.
the python is sneaking up on the chicken.
the mystery of the seven stars that you saw in my right hand and of the seven golden lampstands is this: the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.
to ignore, not pay attention to
they wait until we’re sleeping before they come to shoot us.
some of those present were saying indignantly to one another, "why this waste of perfume?
unhusked rice
beetle
we believe and know that you are the holy one of god."
supper
occupy or pay sole attention to something
and he made known to us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in christ
whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe stands condemned already because they have not believed in the name of god’s one and only son.
to give his people the knowledge of salvation through the forgiveness of their sins,
in joppa there was a disciple named tabitha (in greek her name is dorcas); she was always doing good and helping the poor.
if anyone is ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the son of man will be ashamed of him when he comes in his father's glory with the holy angels."
large fruit bat
he said to them, “therefore every teacher of the law who has become a disciple in the kingdom of heaven is like the owner of a house who brings out of his storeroom new treasures as well as old.”
he shouted at the top of his voice, "what do you want with me, jesus, son of the most high god? swear to god that you won't torture me!"
large, oval, light tan fruit of a tree; governs the time of cutting and planting of rice field; the seed, lagas, is cut up and eaten.
david himself, speaking by the holy spirit, declared: " 'the lord said to my lord: "sit at my right hand until i put your enemies under your feet." '
but the ministry jesus has received is as superior to theirs as the covenant of which he is mediator is superior to the old one, and it is founded on better promises.
but he continued, "you are from below; i am from above. you are of this world; i am not of this world.
when we feel ok about something, it means that we are free of apprehension. we trust in him.
dear friends, i urge you, as aliens and strangers in the world, to abstain from sinful desires, which war against your soul.
now jesus learned that the pharisees had heard that he was gaining and baptizing more disciples than john—
his brother-in-law keeps a store.
and now these three remain: faith, hope and love. but the greatest of these is love.
you’re bossy
or haven’t you read in the law that the priests on sabbath duty in the temple desecrate the sabbath and yet are innocent?
a certain ruler asked him, “good teacher, what must i do to inherit eternal life?”
eggbeater
with many other words he warned them; and he pleaded with them, “save yourselves from this corrupt generation.”
crispus, the synagogue leader, and his entire household believed in the lord; and many of the corinthians who heard paul believed and were baptized.
how many days have i?
this man was seized by the jews and they were about to kill him, but i came with my troops and rescued him, for i had learned that he is a roman citizen.
succeed
if the pangi fruit has just fallen, it is not ready to take.
and find out what pleases the lord.
tomorrow
then i heard every creature in heaven and on earth and under the earth and on the sea, and all that is in them, singing: "to him who sits on the throne and to the lamb be praise and honor and glory and power, for ever and ever!"
jesus said to them, “come and have breakfast.” none of the disciples dared ask him, “who are you?” they knew it was the lord.
going at once to jesus, judas said, “greetings, rabbi!” and kissed him.
pay attention to the child who is leaning [out of] the window who will fall after a while.
saying, 'this fellow began to build and was not able to finish.'
to boost one's strength.
long, light-colored earthworm
john’s disciples came and took his body and buried it. then they went and told jesus.
to lift off as a lid, or stone which is lifted off of shrimp or crabs in the water or bees under a stone
opposition arose, however, from members of the synagogue of the freedmen (as it was called)—jews of cyrene and alexandria as well as the provinces of cilicia and asia—who began to argue with stephen.
lengthen
about an hour later another asserted, "certainly this fellow was with him, for he is a galilean."
to interrupt
all these are the work of one and the same spirit, and he gives them to each one, just as he determines.
gently
who is a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until the redemption of those who are god’s possession—to the praise of his glory.
it will be just like this on the day the son of man is revealed.
solitary thing (like a lone word in a language)
you have let go of the commands of god and are holding on to the traditions of men.
to tear
pray continually,
a tree with cotton-like pods which can be used for pillows
crab
get tired of
suffer
feel upset, hurt, sad, or angry
lumber
curve
sheathe your bolo.
see salilung (shade, shelter)
if there’s any more scandal about you, you’ll be sold.
near; closely related; close to a certain time; almost; nearly
“all things have been committed to me by my father. no one knows who the son is except the father, and no one knows who the father is except the son and those to whom the son chooses to reveal him.”
then some young men came forward, wrapped up his body, and carried him out and buried him.
you, my brothers, were called to be free. but do not use your freedom to indulge the sinful nature ; rather, serve one another in love.
the man who saw it has given testimony, and his testimony is true. he knows that he tells the truth, and he testifies so that you also may believe.
the son of man will go just as it is written about him. but woe to that man who betrays the son of man! it would be better for him if he had not been born.”
who is it that overcomes the world? only he who believes that jesus is the son of god.
but the angel said to him: “do not be afraid, zechariah; your prayer has been heard. your wife elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to call him john.
but how is it to your credit if you receive a beating for doing wrong and endure it? but if you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before god.
knowing it was out of envy that the chief priests had handed jesus over to him.
a bird that talks at night
i and the father are one."
“therefore, my friends, i want you to know that through jesus the forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you.
after he said this, he took some bread and gave thanks to god in front of them all. then he broke it and began to eat
finally the opportune time came. on his birthday herod gave a banquet for his high officials and military commanders and the leading men of galilee.
as for my daughter jeany who fell from a santol tree, she involuntarily cried out because the throbbing pain hurt excessively.
now he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will also supply and increase your store of seed and will enlarge the harvest of your righteousness.
underdeveloped egg (chick didn't hatch)
if the tongue is clamped down on [by one’s teeth], it may become inadvertantly severed.
but i have a baptism to undergo, and how distressed i am until it is completed!
the crocodile forced him into an eel burrow. ??
convinced of this, i know that i will remain, and i will continue with all of you for your progress and joy in the faith,
the death he died, he died to sin once for all; but the life he lives, he lives to god.
a kind of hard wood
you look around to see if there are any more.
beaded belt.
you also, like living stones, are being built into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood, offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to god through jesus christ.
become flattened
slaves, obey your earthly masters with respect and fear, and with sincerity of heart, just as you would obey christ.
husbands, love your wives and do not be harsh with them.
to love him with all your heart, with all your understanding and with all your strength, and to love your neighbor as yourself is more important than all burnt offerings and sacrifices."
curve
the earthquake is strong.
the night is nearly over; the day is almost here. so let us put aside the deeds of darkness and put on the armor of light.
grow
in that day you will no longer ask me anything. i tell you the truth, my father will give you whatever you ask in my name.
do not merely listen to the word, and so deceive yourselves. do what it says.
material, cloth.
you led each other to embrace because you had been reconciled.
we have found this man to be a troublemaker, stirring up riots among the jews all over the world. he is a ringleader of the nazarene sect.
as the soldiers were about to take paul into the barracks, he asked the commander, "may i say something to you?"
endure silently
“come,” he replied, “and you will see.” so they went and saw where he was staying, and they spent that day with him. it was about four in the afternoon.
someone cast a knife /sword at hhis companion but it just happened to lodge in 0the wall.
outside, as of a house or yard
so he made a whip out of cords, and drove all from the temple courts, both sheep and cattle; he scattered the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.
you say, 'i am rich; i have acquired wealth and do not need a thing.' but you do not realize that you are wretched, pitiful, poor, blind and naked.
there is poisonous sap in the seeds of the pangi and in the kolut tuber.
light or brilliance, as from the sun, a lamp, or a flashlight
he is the image of the invisible god, the firstborn over all creation.
to feel cold
be blinded temporarily by brilliance of light
things known from long ago.
it was the day of preparation of the passover; it was about noon. “here is your king,” pilate said to the jews.
and that he may send the messiah, who has been appointed for you—even jesus.
pick up and carry something away
and we have the word of the prophets made more certain, and you will do well to pay attention to it, as to a light shining in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.
knee
are we trying to arouse the lord's jealousy? are we stronger than he?
motion of an animal's foot when it scratches
therefore, since we have been justified through faith, we have peace with god through our lord jesus christ,
the rain will obliterate the footprints.
for two whole years paul stayed there in his own rented house and welcomed all who came to see him.
kill, murdered.
and if he finds it, truly i tell you, he is happier about that one sheep than about the ninety-nine that did not wander off.
small, carved wooden spoon.
evening
rust.
we know that we have passed from death to life, because we love our brothers. anyone who does not love remains in death.
involved
paul, an apostle of christ jesus by the will of god, in keeping with the promise of life that is in christ jesus,
to move a little,
we know that we live in him and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit.
treat well, be kind
as for the liboganon river, the cane is thick there in the flad area and its body is hard.
at this the jews began to grumble about him because he said, "i am the bread that came down from heaven."
but do not forget this one thing, dear friends: with the lord a day is like a thousand years, and a thousand years are like a day.
many a time i went from one synagogue to another to have them punished, and i tried to force them to blaspheme. in my obsession against them, i even went to foreign cities to persecute them.
some time later, jesus went up to jerusalem for one of the jewish festivals.
the spirit told philip, “go to that chariot and stay near it.”
the god of this age has blinded the minds of unbelievers, so that they cannot see the light of the gospel that displays the glory of christ, who is the image of god.
climb
to finish
a man says, “my wife has become pregnant on me; maybe she will give birth when i am absent.”
there was a student who was out of control who was slashing at his companions.
but i tell you that it will be more bearable for sodom on the day of judgment than for you.”
after jesus said this, he looked toward heaven and prayed:
christ is the culmination of the law so that there may be righteousness for everyone who believes.
but if it is preached that christ has been raised from the dead, how can some of you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?
hair bangs.
yet a time is coming and has now come when the true worshipers will worship the father in the spirit and in truth, for they are the kind of worshipers the father seeks.
it is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile; it is thrown out. "he who has ears to hear, let him hear."
suddenly jesus met them. “greetings,” he said. they came to him, clasped his feet and worshiped him.
when i broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many basketfuls of pieces did you pick up?" "twelve," they replied.
brothers, i urge you to bear with my word of exhortation, for i have written you only a short letter.
so if god gave them the same gift he gave us who believed in the lord jesus christ, who was i to think that i could stand in god’s way?”
to be bent over
reciprocate an exchange of a brideprice
come near to god and he will come near to you. wash your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you double-minded.
the person who laughs without showing his teeth keeps his mouth closed when he laughs. just some people do that.
use the camote leaves to cover the water tube
selfish person
as for a woman who is newly pregnant, if she cannot eat what she is craving for, the pregnancy will be terminated because the baby will come out.
for if joshua had given them rest, god would not have spoken later about another day.
flee the evil desires of youth, and pursue righteousness, faith, love and peace, along with those who call on the lord out of a pure heart.
why did you take a huge fistful of rice when we are really many?
after all, if you were cut out of an olive tree that is wild by nature, and contrary to nature were grafted into a cultivated olive tree, how much more readily will these, the natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree!
and will give our attention to prayer and the ministry of the word.”
wrap rice in a banana leaf
third right string of kobbiung
it got wet some time ago.
spear
for the creation waits in eager expectation for the children of god to be revealed.
moistened lime
as so
i looked into it and saw four-footed animals of the earth, wild beasts, reptiles and birds.
the pharisees said to him, "look, why are they doing what is unlawful on the sabbath?"
to the holy and faithful brothers in christ at colosse: grace and peace to you from god our father.
radio, tape recorder
but he was rebuked for his wrongdoing by a donkey--a beast without speech--who spoke with a man's voice and restrained the prophet's madness.
i appeal to you, brothers and sisters, in the name of our lord jesus christ, that all of you agree with one another in what you say and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be perfectly united in mind and thought.
the student is not above the teacher, but everyone who is fully trained will be like their teacher.
the tikò insect moves its head up and down when we hold onto its body.
grip tightly
that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked.
it is written in the prophets: 'they will all be taught by god.' everyone who listens to the father and learns from him comes to me.
ask the lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.”
yet elijah was not sent to any of them, but to a widow in zarephath in the region of sidon.
labor pains
at that time the disciples came to jesus and asked, “who, then, is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?”
if we desire a girl when this is the first time we have seen her, that is the attraction of the eye(s) because if we don’t see that girl [any more], we will just forget about her.
pronged arrow for shooting doves
pronged fish spear
they cause [the house/village] to be taken by surprise when they have banded together in mass to attack so that all can, without exception, kill everyone.
soon
throw away
a person in the mountains calls water which is swift, mabonbon (“strong”).
the thanksgiving ceremony, that is the beginning of eating rice which is presented to god.  [someone] kills a pig and chickens.
dear children, this is the last hour; and as you have heard that the antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have come. this is how we know it is the last hour.
"no one can come to me unless the father who sent me draws him, and i will raise him up at the last day
see to it that no one takes you captive through hollow and deceptive philosophy, which depends on human tradition and the elemental spiritual forces of this world rather than on christ.
as they traveled from town to town, they delivered the decisions reached by the apostles and elders in jerusalem for the people to obey.
if the limestone is pounded into a powder it can by used as lime.
to be excited as someone about to ride in an airplane for the first time
lid of a basket or cooking pot
only hold on to what you have until i come.
“you unbelieving and perverse generation,” jesus replied, “how long shall i stay with you and put up with you? bring your son here.”
turmeric plant used to cook with meat
to deviate.
but scripture has locked up everything under the control of sin, so that what was promised, being given through faith in jesus christ, might be given to those who believe.
for if i grieve you, who is left to make me glad but you whom i have grieved?
the death he died, he died to sin once for all; but the life he lives, he lives to god.
we had a saw which was an instrument for cutting off roofing.
to remove dishes and leftovers after a meal has been eaten.
now the day on which jesus had made the mud and opened the man’s eyes was a sabbath.
join together, as villages
to rinse mouth
how foolish! what you sow does not come to life unless it dies.
for he says, “in the time of my favor i heard you, and in the day of salvation i helped you.” i tell you, now is the time of god’s favor, now is the day of salvation.
the albino antabun heron has no mixture of design because it is completely white.
to have a fiery temper; to be fierce or brave.
and he is also the father of the circumcised who not only are circumcised but who also walk in the footsteps of the faith that our father abraham had before he was circumcised.
i’ll use the scraps for patching
john said to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him, “you brood of vipers! who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
avoid every kind of evil.
the lord will rescue me from every evil attack and will bring me safely to his heavenly kingdom. to him be glory for ever and ever. amen.
we were surprised at amutatoy, that he came visiting at midnight.
climb around on branches or logs
nothing
plant any grain
"i tell you, my friends, do not be afraid of those who kill the body and after that can do no more.
beads, necklace
when the angels had left them and gone into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, “let’s go to bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the lord has told us about.”
now then, you and the sanhedrin petition the commander to bring him before you on the pretext of wanting more accurate information about his case. we are ready to kill him before he gets here."
at that time his voice shook the earth, but now he has promised, "once more i will shake not only the earth but also the heavens."
we are not going too far in our boasting, as would be the case if we had not come to you, for we did get as far as you with the gospel of christ.
after herod had a thorough search made for him and did not find him, he cross-examined the guards and ordered that they be executed. then herod went from judea to caesarea and stayed there.
to this end i labor, struggling with all his energy, which so powerfully works in me.
as simon peter stood warming himself, he was asked, "you are not one of his disciples, are you?" he denied it, saying, "i am not."
when we are in a good relationship with our companions, if there is a small problem, it will be quickly resolved.
but when the sun came up, the plants were scorched, and they withered because they had no root.
throwing his cloak aside, he jumped to his feet and came to jesus.
to cut a tree on one side so that it will fall in the direction it is leaning
when it was almost time for the jewish passover, jesus went up to jerusalem.
the pharisee stood by himself and prayed: ‘god, i thank you that i am not like other people—robbers, evildoers, adulterers—or even like this tax collector.
this happened three times, and then it was all pulled up to heaven again.
to be far away from
she’s clapping her hands.
enemy
some people are like seed along the path, where the word is sown. as soon as they hear it, satan comes and takes away the word that was sown in them.
if someone has become widowed and for three days has not been able to go out [of the house] (lit. walk), we get a piece of cloth/clothing by which we signify that it is ok now for you to run errands as this clothing is what i use to release you because i have decided to release [you].
you are the same height
push the raft
spread something out
sit down.
to be upset.
woe to you when everyone speaks well of you, for that is how their ancestors treated the false prophets.
wait or delay
spread out; open to display, open, as a flower
sore ribs, a pain in the side
the head of a turtle is pulled back and inside its body.
"you are demon-possessed," the crowd answered. "who is trying to kill you?"
a hammock; to swing in a hammock
to follow the channel of a creek.
to playfully threaten to hit someone
aware of this, jesus withdrew from that place. a large crowd followed him, and he healed all who were ill.
nor did they repent of their murders, their magic arts, their sexual immorality or their thefts.
as for that relentless pursuing, an unmarried man keeps coming back until he can obtain that which he is requesting. it is like the person from whom he is begging is being forced to give.
for if joshua had given them rest, god would not have spoken later about another day.
“you did not choose me, but i chose you and appointed you so that you might go and bear fruit—fruit that will last—and so that whatever you ask in my name the father will give you.”
hmm, so what then should we use for medicine?
then the king will say to those on his right, ‘come, you who are blessed by my father; take your inheritance, the kingdom prepared for you since the creation of the world.
(this mary, whose brother lazarus now lay sick, was the same one who poured perfume on the lord and wiped his feet with her hair.)
a kind of wood which is used in rice fetish.
a buck.
to get a bonanza as a huge catch of fish or a jackpot in gambling
does god give you his spirit and work miracles among you because you observe the law, or because you believe what you heard?
who were they who heard and rebelled? were they not all those moses led out of egypt?
"from childhood," he answered. "it has often thrown him into fire or water to kill him. but if you can do anything, take pity on us and help us."
he touched her hand and the fever left her, and she got up and began to wait on him.
to sniff at one's cheek
they went out and preached that people should repent.
was a man already circumcised when he was called? he should not become uncircumcised. was a man uncircumcised when he was called? he should not be circumcised.
to rest.
the arms will be obstructed by the material if the sleeves are too narrow; they won’t fit.
taganay is the one who took care of lita's children who were left behind.
this money is enough for you to reach davao.
all the brothers here send you greetings. greet one another with a holy kiss.
when they finished, james spoke up. “brothers,” he said, “listen to me.
make something strong or sturdy
after this letter has been read to you, see that it is also read in the church of the laodiceans and that you in turn read the letter from laodicea.
with his wife’s full knowledge he kept back part of the money for himself, but brought the rest and put it at the apostles’ feet.
finally i checked out the fish trap and it was was |filled|with small fish which were caught in the fish trap.
steam
when he landed at caesarea, he went up and greeted the church and then went down to antioch.
and rescued him from all his troubles. he gave joseph wisdom and enabled him to gain the goodwill of pharaoh king of egypt. so pharaoh made him ruler over egypt and all his palace.
grow or develop
and the father who sent me has himself testified concerning me. you have never heard his voice nor seen his form,
“the merchants of the earth will weep and mourn over her because no one buys their cargoes anymore—
“nazareth! can anything good come from there?” nathanael asked. “come and see,” said philip.
when jesus had finished speaking, a pharisee invited him to eat with him; so he went in and reclined at the table.
“and now, father, glorify me in your presence with the glory i had with you before the world began.”
choke
but paul shouted, "don't harm yourself! we are all here!"
wind
he bent over and looked in at the strips of linen lying there but did not go in.
when the discussion of the gathered people was finished, they left for home. there were no people left.
there in maambago there were those who were caused to plant corn.
compassionate
do you not know that your bodies are temples of the holy spirit, who is in you, whom you have received from god? you are not your own;
floor ankle length skirt or trousers.
consider the ravens: they do not sow or reap, they have no storeroom or barn; yet god feeds them. and how much more valuable you are than birds!
this is the covenant i will make with the house of israel after that time, declares the lord. i will put my laws in their minds and write them on their hearts. i will be their god, and they will be my people.
there were about twelve men in all.
we can just sow the seed carelessly if we have lots of seed.
to whittle rattan.
word
a span of about two yards; from fingertip to fingertip; 4 dopas the unit of measure of material or beads
small wasp
to watch over, take care of, protect
and the holy spirit descended on him in bodily form like a dove. and a voice came from heaven: “you are my son, whom i love; with you i am well pleased.”
but if that place is abandoned, it will be quiet; there will be no more people and no talking that we can hear.
if we go inside a cavern, there will be light in front of us.
to castrate.
but instead, one brother takes another to court—and this in front of unbelievers!
but it turned out that he failed [to keep his promise] and he did not repay [the money he borrowed].
this happened three times, and then it was all pulled up to heaven again.
when we cross [a river], we detour around the deep [part] and seek out the shallow [area] so that we won't be swept away by the current into the deep pool.
dear friends, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from god, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
fifty
the term] pogko-uyag “resurrected”, comes from having died.
to whine for food
it is for freedom that christ has set us free. stand firm, then, and do not let yourselves be burdened again by a yoke of slavery.
the money earned from his bamboo was used up by the person whom he had entrusted
forgive, be nice to each other
paddle of canoe
corn field
the child is nursing.
submit yourselves, then, to god. resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
put it between those
flame up, as fire when fanned
emotionally distraught
footprint, handprint, fingerprint, or impression
"don't be alarmed," he said. "you are looking for jesus the nazarene, who was crucified. he has risen! he is not here. see the place where they laid him.
“i have testimony weightier than that of john. for the works that the father has given me to finish—the very works that i am doing—testify that the father has sent me.
he said to another man, "follow me." but the man replied, "lord, first let me go and bury my father."
raise eyebrows as a signal
a root of kind of the kamulu vine used for kuglung strings
and after taking some food, he regained his strength. saul spent several days with the disciples in damascus.
the thanksgiving ceremony, that is the beginning of eating rice which is presented to god.  [someone] kills a pig and chickens.
good, a good situation; blessing
a mother leaves rice behind for gruel to be fed to her child.
near the speaker
then jesus asked him, "what is your name?"
break off spontaneously
rip
with the tongue we praise our lord and father, and with it we curse men, who have been made in god's likeness.
i tell you, on that night two people will be in one bed; one will be taken and the other left.
these sweet potatoes are crowding each other because they have many tubers (lit. fruits).
have a difficult time in childbirth
now for some time a man named simon had practiced sorcery in the city and amazed all the people of samaria. he boasted that he was someone great,
when the child inches forward, the midwife causes it to accompany her hands.
slice vegetables
swim overhand.
we loved you so much that we were delighted to share with you not only the gospel of god but our lives as well, because you had become so dear to us.
no matter what i said, my mother would not agree to stay with her other daughter
sass one’s elders
if one builds a house, he begins to make it.
in our place, it is necessary that we be well-behaved so that we won't be discredited.
to become dried up
drawstring
even some of the officials of the province, friends of paul, sent him a message begging him not to venture into the theater.
if he called them 'gods,' to whom the word of god came--and the scripture cannot be broken--
i don't know.
they all joined together constantly in prayer, along with the women and mary the mother of jesus, and with his brothers.
and the enemy who sows them is the devil. the harvest is the end of the age, and the harvesters are angels.
if the measles illness reaches some place, if there is someone who visits from that place, the disease will be transmitted to us.
i have written you quite boldly on some points, as if to remind you of them again, because of the grace god gave me
embroider.
"beware of the teachers of the law. they like to walk around in flowing robes and love to be greeted in the marketplaces and have the most important seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets.
for it is declared: "you are a priest forever, in the order of melchizedek."
“who touched me?” jesus asked. when they all denied it, peter said, “master, the people are crowding and pressing against you.”
dear friends, this is now my second letter to you. i have written both of them as reminders to stimulate you to wholesome thinking.
ancestors
he died for us so that, whether we are awake or asleep, we may live together with him.
“the jewish people all know the way i have lived ever since i was a child, from the beginning of my life in my own country, and also in jerusalem.
for i am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor demons, neither the present nor the future, nor any powers,
camote.
at iconium paul and barnabas went as usual into the jewish synagogue. there they spoke so effectively that a great number of jews and greeks believed.
he did not discriminate between us and them, for he purified their hearts by faith.
slide or cut kernels from a corncob
but our citizenship is in heaven. and we eagerly await a savior from there, the lord jesus christ,
and the gospel must first be preached to all nations.
don't be deceived, my dear brothers.
after i go through macedonia, i will come to you—for i will be going through macedonia.
vine
lid of a basket or cooking pot
the fare of transportation has increased.
simeon took him in his arms and praised god, saying:
bright, light of the moon
dark
when paul placed his hands on them, the holy spirit came on them, and they spoke in tongues and prophesied.
a person who is cheerful is quick to laugh if he/she sees his/her companion(s). it's like he/she has no worries.
because of this, god gave them over to shameful lusts. even their women exchanged natural sexual relations for unnatural ones.
apply a liquid to the hair
i cause my back to bend backwards when i lean back and over against something because my back hurts.
while he was saying this, a synagogue leader came and knelt before him and said, “my daughter has just died. but come and put your hand on her, and she will live.”
philip found nathanael and told him, “we have found the one moses wrote about in the law, and about whom the prophets also wrote—jesus of nazareth, the son of joseph.”
snatch others from the fire and save them; to others show mercy, mixed with fear--hating even the clothing stained by corrupted flesh.
daybreak, dawn
i will boast about a man like that, but i will not boast about myself, except about my weaknesses.
"blessed is the coming kingdom of our father david!" "hosanna in the highest!"
now the pharisees who had been sent
being confident of this, that he who began a good work in you will carry it on to completion until the day of christ jesus.
full of food
the jews pushed alexander to the front, and some of the crowd shouted instructions to him. he motioned for silence in order to make a defense before the people.
i looked, and there before me was a white cloud, and seated on the cloud was one like a son of man with a crown of gold on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful and thankful.
"does our law condemn anyone without first hearing him to find out what he is doing?"
yet a time is coming and has now come when the true worshipers will worship the father in the spirit and in truth, for they are the kind of worshipers the father seeks.
they brought jesus to the place called golgotha (which means the place of the skull)
wrap rice in a banana leaf
"you have heard the blasphemy. what do you think?"
even if we’re reached by murderers, nevermind because we’ll just endure it.
do not get any gold or silver or copper to take with you in your belts—
encase
but suppose the servant says to himself, 'my master is taking a long time in coming,' and he then begins to beat the menservants and maidservants and to eat and drink and get drunk.
slow-burning
bad sign
comb handle
i'm going to move to another place.
do not be anxious about anything, but in everything, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to god.
at this, the man's ears were opened, his tongue was loosened and he began to speak plainly.
but he denied it. "woman, i don't know him," he said.
fellow israelites, listen to this: jesus of nazareth was a man accredited by god to you by miracles, wonders and signs, which god did among you through him, as you yourselves know.
in the center, around the throne, were four living creatures, and they were covered with eyes, in front and in back. the first living creature was like a lion, the second was like an ox, the third had a face like a man, the fourth was like a flying eagle.
jesus went out as usual to the mount of olives, and his disciples followed him.
the jabbing pole was fitted together because it was extended.
"o jerusalem, jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you, how often i have longed to gather your children together, as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you were not willing!
but about the resurrection of the dead—have you not read what god said to you,
having dark holes
she had suffered a great deal under the care of many doctors and had spent all she had, yet instead of getting better she grew worse.
but the one who does not know and does things deserving punishment will be beaten with few blows. from everyone who has been given much, much will be demanded; and from the one who has been entrusted with much, much more will be asked.
be shy
the dog is barking.
when he came back, he again found them sleeping, because their eyes were heavy.
he who hates me hates my father as well.
uncle made a mortar which was small but the mouth [of the mortar] was spacious and deep.
and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut out of the rock. he rolled a big stone in front of the entrance to the tomb and went away.
if someone is very worried, he comes apart emotionally.
when jesus' followers saw what was going to happen, they said, "lord, should we strike with our swords?"
look, he is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, even those who pierced him; and all the peoples of the earth will mourn because of him. so shall it be! amen.
and i saw the seven angels who stand before god, and seven trumpets were given to them.
as one who is in the lord jesus, i am fully convinced that no food is unclean in itself. but if anyone regards something as unclean, then for him it is unclean.
listen, my dear brothers: has not god chosen those who are poor in the eyes of the world to be rich in faith and to inherit the kingdom he promised those who love him?
those who had seen it told the people how the demon-possessed man had been cured.
behave in such a way as to upset others
to crumble with the fingers, mash up
the twenty-four elders fall down before him who sits on the throne, and worship him who lives for ever and ever. they lay their crowns before the throne and say:
celebration
we didn't rely on you.
to spread on
very good; made very well
but that you may know that the son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins . . . ." he said to the paralytic, "i tell you, get up, take your mat and go home."
but when he saw the person who was wounded, he detoured. he passed by on the other side of the path.
so do not be afraid of them, for there is nothing concealed that will not be disclosed, or hidden that will not be made known.
as evening approached, the disciples came to him and said, “this is a remote place, and it’s already getting late. send the crowds away, so they can go to the villages and buy themselves some food.”
when we aim [a gun] at a bird, and when iwe have sighted  it [we] shoot the gun the and then [the bird] is hit.
the manobo people, when they carry a lunch of rice, they wrap it up with a banana leaf.
so neither the one who plants nor the one who waters is anything, but only god, who makes things grow.
lump of soft sap used as pitch
if they don't have land they are residing on someone else's land.
for, as i have often told you before and now say again even with tears, many live as enemies of the cross of christ.
the bunduy tree is leafing out now
no one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, for the patch will pull away from the garment, making the tear worse.
it is like a mustard seed, which is the smallest seed you plant in the ground.
blue
the two people were racing [each other].
if your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off and throw it away. it is better for you to enter life maimed or crippled than to have two hands or two feet and be thrown into eternal fire.
someone took away a portion of my land.
disappear
the kampilan is a warrior's knife used to kill people.
it's ripening is lacking; it’s not yet filled in.
for you know that it was not with perishable things such as silver or gold that you were redeemed from the empty way of life handed down to you from your forefathers,
his mercy extends to those who fear him, from generation to generation.
short second-growth trees or forest
way, go by way of.
i'll work by the day for aunt domingga so that i can earn [some] money
to smear
sudsuron ta ka mundù.
suddenly a great company of the heavenly host appeared with the angel, praising god and saying,
cold spring
there is a tarp which was used to cap ena's house.
is christ divided? was paul crucified for you? were you baptized into the name of paul?
dump out
always or frequently
after that, we who are still alive and are left will be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the lord in the air. and so we will be with the lord forever.
flood over beaches
very itchy skin disease
they will be divided, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-inlaw."
large shell used as a horn to call people or scare raiders
hard shell
and god raised us up with christ and seated us with him in the heavenly realms in christ jesus,
amasig has a cough.
if a person has a concern and then his breath is helped, his brow relaxes.
“are you still so dull?” jesus asked them.  don’t you see that whatever enters the mouth goes into the stomach and then out of the body?
stay put
a small black and white spotted  electric eel
horse or dog fight
should
gather together to talk about something.
when he had gone a little farther, he saw james son of zebedee and his brother john in a boat, preparing their nets.
this is my defense to those who sit in judgment on me.
and they knew nothing about what would happen until the flood came and took them all away. that is how it will be at the coming of the son of man.
at this, those who heard began to go away one at a time, the older ones first, until only jesus was left, with the woman still standing there.
the water has puddled.
the great dragon was hurled down—that ancient serpent called the devil, or satan, who leads the whole world astray. he was hurled to the earth, and his angels with him.
scraps of material, paper, or mat material
put to death, therefore, whatever belongs to your earthly nature: sexual immorality, impurity, lust, evil desires and greed, which is idolatry.
the waterpole is cracked
others, like seed sown on rocky places, hear the word and at once receive it with joy
we are expect that the plane [may come] tomorrow
overwhelmed
these things happened so that the scripture would be fulfilled: "not one of his bones will be broken,"
the fish are being trapped by impeding the flow of the water.
ancestor
yours
while peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest came by.
if the speech is not finished, we don't know what a person is telling us.
scrape out, as papaya seeds
greet ampliatus, my dear friend in the lord.
body louse
then jesus said to him, “see that you don’t tell anyone. but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the gift moses commanded, as a testimony to them.”
if that place is abandoned, there will be no more people whom we will  hear talking.
then he asked the second, ‘and how much do you owe?’ ‘a thousand bushels of wheat,’ he replied. he told him, ‘take your bill and make it eight hundred.’
a man in the crowd answered, "teacher, i brought you my son, who is possessed by a spirit that has robbed him of speech.
for, as i have often told you before and now say again even with tears, many live as enemies of the cross of christ.
i saw thrones on which were seated those who had been given authority to judge. and i saw the souls of those who had been beheaded because of their testimony about jesus and because of the word of god. they had not worshiped the beast or its image and had not received its mark on their foreheads or their hands. they came to life and reigned with christ a thousand years.
to take something or someone back
the jailer told paul, "the magistrates have ordered that you and silas be released. now you can leave. go in peace."
by faith we understand that the universe was formed at god’s command, so that what is seen was not made out of what was visible.
skinny
mery has to detour when she goes to school because there is no shortcut path nearby.
and this is what he promised us--even eternal life.
when it is already afternoon [about] three o’clock, the sun becomes obscured and the thunder clouds become dark.
borer or carpenter bee.
the radio is on top of the table.
after the festival was over, while his parents were returning home, the boy jesus stayed behind in jerusalem, but they were unaware of it.
become, change into something else.
toilet
beach or rocky bottom of a river
but there are some jews from the province of asia, who ought to be here before you and bring charges if they have anything against me.
if a woman says, “i will have been made pregnant,” it means, “someone has sinned against me.”
run noisily
suitable
the person, he is repeatedly carrying wood on his shoulders to use to for building a fire.
we enter into the one singing a love song. we encourage them by saying, “continue singing love songs.” by that means, we are entering into our mutual joy.
instead, it should be that of your inner self, the unfading beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is of great worth in god's sight.
too much
lita told mery to sleep at their place. mery stayed a short time with them because she joined [them] for only one night.
if we get a thorn in our foot, we will pick it out with a needle so that it will be removed.
this calls for patient endurance on the part of the saints who obey god's commandments and remain faithful to jesus.
when we work, we [should] do what we do wholeheartedly.
live such good lives among the pagans that, though they accuse you of doing wrong, they may see your good deeds and glorify god on the day he visits us.
infection with pus and scabby skin.
when you have become trained, you have strength and it is easy for you because you have become accustomed [to the work].
the pig is my guarantee that i have reserved the horse.
as for the child who has been neglected, he/she is lacking food, clothing, bathing and has no house to live in.
travel up and over a summit
the seventh angel poured out his bowl into the air, and out of the temple came a loud voice from the throne, saying, "it is done!"
rapids of a river.
contents
more than that, we are then found to be false witnesses about god, for we have testified about god that he raised christ from the dead. but he did not raise him if in fact the dead are not raised.
move or walk backwards
i am astonished that you are so quickly deserting the one who called you to live in the grace of christ and are turning to a different gospel—
he came and preached peace to you who were far away and peace to those who were near.
it’s stained already.
hundred
but martha was distracted by all the preparations that had to be made. she came to him and asked, “lord, don’t you care that my sister has left me to do the work by myself? tell her to help me!”
to do.
from troas we put out to sea and sailed straight for samothrace, and the next day we went on to neapolis.
to go over horizon as the moon
i tell you that this man, rather than the other, went home justified before god. for all those who exalt themselves will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted.”
adam's apple
to rip
but how is it to your credit if you receive a beating for doing wrong and endure it? but if you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before god.
knotted rattan used as a calendar or appointment reminder
“what is written in the law?” he replied. “how do you read it?”
some people are slow to get out of breath when he/she swims underwater and touches the bottom of a deep pool.
“‘what shall i do, lord?’ i asked.
yellow
“you are a child of the devil and an enemy of everything that is right! you are full of all kinds of deceit and trickery. will you never stop perverting the right ways of the lord?
yet for us there is but one god, the father, from whom all things came and for whom we live; and there is but one lord, jesus christ, through whom all things came and through whom we live.
top border of a basket
become bent or dented, as metal
the centurion replied, “lord, i do not deserve to have you come under my roof. but just say the word, and my servant will be healed.
one of the first atas
but the pharisees and the teachers of the law muttered, "this man welcomes sinners and eats with them."
for it is declared: "you are a priest forever, in the order of melchizedek."
wherever the tether of the dog ends, that is where he will be limited.
we get smaller when we get skinny.
part
do carefully.
sap or juice of a tree
astringent
jesus replied, "i will ask you one question. answer me, and i will tell you by what authority i am doing these things.
confront
a kind of red apusow
so we all agreed to choose some men and send them to you with our dear friends barnabas and paul—
comfort
the rain came down, the streams rose, and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it fell with a great crash.
at the time of the banquet he sent his servant to tell those who had been invited, 'come, for everything is now ready.'
if we place the radio on the floor, it is likely that it will be stepped on or come apart.
"my name is legion," he replied, "for we are many." and he begged jesus again and again not to send them out of the area.
“so he left the land of the chaldeans and settled in harran. after the death of his father, god sent him to this land where you are now living.
at that time jesus went through the grainfields on the sabbath. his disciples were hungry and began to pick some heads of grain and eat them.
heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse those who have leprosy, drive out demons. freely you have received; freely give.
and again, "praise the lord, all you gentiles, and sing praises to him, all you peoples."
he told them, "the secret of the kingdom of god has been given to you. but to those on the outside everything is said in parables
yours
pay attention to the child who is leaning [out of] the window who will fall after a while.
more than forty men were involved in this plot.
the second angel sounded his trumpet, and something like a huge mountain, all ablaze, was thrown into the sea. a third of the sea turned into blood,
boy
as soon as
east
in everything i did, i showed you that by this kind of hard work we must help the weak, remembering the words the lord jesus himself said: 'it is more blessed to give than to receive.' "
to pay a brideprice
i eagerly expect and hope that i will in no way be ashamed, but will have sufficient courage so that now as always christ will be exalted in my body, whether by life or by death.
"the older brother became angry and refused to go in. so his father went out and pleaded with him.
conical-shaped fish trap made of smooth bamboo strips
he plied him with many questions, but jesus gave him no answer.
come from, originate
to recede
to sprinkle (as powder or seed)
then they asked him, "what must we do to do the works god requires?"
one person says, “you are actually a slave.” i will respond, “yes indeed because i am his pangabaga “representative”
fungal disease of the skin
freckled
the neck at the base of the head.
to glue or stick something onto something else
try to converse.
herbal remedy
and will hand him over to the gentiles to be mocked and flogged and crucified. on the third day he will be raised to life!”
yet saul grew more and more powerful and baffled the jews living in damascus by proving that jesus is the messiah.
when they had crossed over, they landed at gennesaret.
the reason why that tree is called dayuan is because the birds flock to it to pluck the baliti fruit.
leaving nazareth, he went and lived in capernaum, which was by the lake in the area of zebulun and naphtali—
work as a group
to help
large
necklace
here is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance: christ jesus came into the world to save sinners—of whom i am the worst.
we forget about our companions [when] we simply abandon them.
to discern flavor.
but they did not understand what this meant. it was hidden from them, so that they did not grasp it, and they were afraid to ask him about it.
igì’s hair is very black.
someone will ask, “where is the eating place here?” and then we will point it out [saying], “the eating place is on the other side.”
as for the buriak spear, the shaft has been decorated and has been wrapped with bronze to make the shaft beautiful (lit. good to see) up to the reinforced tip.
and he will send his angels and gather his elect from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of the heavens.
if the the [amount of] rain is a lot, the inside of the boat will be filled
indeed, in our hearts we felt the sentence of death. but this happened that we might not rely on ourselves but on god, who raises the dead.
collapse.
to be angry, fed up
cloth or abaka fiber bag worn on the back
whatever medicine is effective against an illness, that is strong medicine.
he gave them permission, and the evil spirits came out and went into the pigs. the herd, about two thousand in number, rushed down the steep bank into the lake and were drowned.
the one who plants and the one who waters have one purpose, and they will each be rewarded according to their own labor.
carry on the head
while they were wondering about this, suddenly two men in clothes that gleamed like lightning stood beside them.
“men, i can see that our voyage is going to be disastrous and bring great loss to ship and cargo, and to our own lives also.”
when evening came, jesus was reclining at the table with the twelve.
dark
in him was life, and that life was the light of all mankind.
he sent two of his helpers, timothy and erastus, to macedonia, while he stayed in the province of asia a little longer.
then pilate announced to the chief priests and the crowd, "i find no basis for a charge against this man."
japanese type beetle
very
a huge fish or long teeth
late in the afternoon the twelve came to him and said, “send the crowd away so they can go to the surrounding villages and countryside and find food and lodging, because we are in a remote place here.”
how much more valuable is a person than a sheep! therefore it is lawful to do good on the sabbath.”
and say to the owner of the house, 'the teacher asks: where is the guest room, where i may eat the passover with my disciples?'
all who sin apart from the law will also perish apart from the law, and all who sin under the law will be judged by the law.
the crowd joined in the attack against paul and silas, and the magistrates
to jesus the mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that speaks a better word than the blood of abel.
we boarded a ship from adramyttium about to sail for ports along the coast of the province of asia, and we put out to sea. aristarchus, a macedonian from thessalonica, was with us.
preserve raw meat by placing it in a bamboo tube
we are not treated well by the people because our advantage (lit. value) in having wood has gone to them.
the person who works in a field, he/she won't receive money for working until the corn has been harvested.
“because the patriarchs were jealous of joseph, they sold him as a slave into egypt. but god was with him
tire, tire tracks
since
to growl
and jason has welcomed them into his house. they are all defying caesar’s decrees, saying that there is another king, one called jesus.”
when there are many [grubs] which are making whispery  and gurgling [sounds], then we split knotched pula palm log and we see many grubs which are squirming.
as for its pupa, its dwelling place is encased.
gods
exercize self control.
god, whom i serve in my spirit in preaching the gospel of his son, is my witness how constantly i remember you
he just [purposely] forgets it; he doesn't pay attention to it.
when the pharisees saw this, they said to him, “look! your disciples are doing what is unlawful on the sabbath.”
pangi fruit carried by a river current
to be born with a split lip
result
put it away now
the kabugkul hawk/eagle is greedy for chicks.
"what are you arguing with them about?" he asked.
“then a famine struck all egypt and canaan, bringing great suffering, and our ancestors could not find food.
so he bent over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her. she got up at once and began to wait on them.
since they were spending many days there, festus discussed paul's case with the king. he said: "there is a man here whom felix left as a prisoner.
and he asked them, “whose image is this? and whose inscription?”
do not destroy the work of god for the sake of food. all food is clean, but it is wrong for a man to eat anything that causes someone else to stumble.
evil spirit causing illness
first, you call [the sleeping person]. if he doesn't sense it we take hold of him so that he will be disturbed from sleep.
jesus had compassion on them and touched their eyes. immediately they received their sight and followed him.
then philip ran up to the chariot and heard the man reading isaiah the prophet. “do you understand what you are reading?” philip asked.
i did not see a temple in the city, because the lord god almighty and the lamb are its temple.
then i heard what sounded like a voice among the four living creatures, saying, “two pounds of wheat for a day’s wages, and six pounds of barley for a day’s wages, and do not damage the oil and the wine!”
so then, if she has sexual relations with another man while her husband is still alive, she is called an adulteress. but if her husband dies, she is released from that law and is not an adulteress if she marries another man.
sharp stakes
a very short person is a dwarf.
as for a person who is able to do a miracle, he has power to do something amazing.
earthworm
finally pilate handed him over to them to be crucified. so the soldiers took charge of jesus.
for he was looking forward to the city with foundations, whose architect and builder is god.
fill the hole with earth.
as they traveled from town to town, they delivered the decisions reached by the apostles and elders in jerusalem for the people to obey.
and saw the lord speaking. 'quick!' he said to me. 'leave jerusalem immediately, because they will not accept your testimony about me.'
if anyone says anything to you, say that the lord needs them, and he will send them right away.”
i won’t give to you because there isn’t enough for one each.
defecate
when i was on the beach, i was caught by the wind of a strong whirlwind.
in the days of abiathar the high priest, he entered the house of god and ate the consecrated bread, which is lawful only for priests to eat. and he also gave some to his companions."
go inside
name of a creek.
a person's circumstance
under
pounce
i was not able to restrain my anger at that person.
for it is commendable if a man bears up under the pain of unjust suffering because he is conscious of god.
jesus told them another parable: “the kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field.
the brightness of a glow is faint.
there was a person who was sawing togop wood into boards.
then the high priest asked stephen, “are these charges true?”
i slept by myself.
because it is consecrated by the word of god and prayer.
so what shall i do? i will pray with my spirit, but i will also pray with my mind; i will sing with my spirit, but i will also sing with my mind.
when they came to jesus, they pleaded earnestly with him, “this man deserves to have you do this,
if the tongue is clamped down on, it can be severed.
whoever believes and is baptized will be saved, but whoever does not believe will be condemned.
but this has all taken place that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled.” then all the disciples deserted him and fled.
but the tax collector stood at a distance. he would not even look up to heaven, but beat his breast and said, ‘god, have mercy on me, a sinner.’
saying, "i will surely bless you and give you many descendants."
antonio testified against my uncle.
put the mortar under the house lest it get rained on.
if someone is ill, that is the person over which a shaman will perform a pig sacrifice.
plant used for fish poison.
likewise, every good tree bears good fruit, but a bad tree bears bad fruit.  a good tree cannot bear bad fruit, and a bad tree cannot bear good fruit.
muslim haircut
tiny pollywog
noodles.
“he will glorify me because it is from me that he will receive what he will make known to you.”
refuse to give
camotes that won’t root but just creep all over.
for three and a half days some from every people, tribe, language and nation will gaze on their bodies and refuse them burial.
boast; show off
love song to a girl
close together
ancestor, forefather, especially from ancient times
idolatry and witchcraft; hatred, discord, jealousy, fits of rage, selfish ambition, dissensions, factions
and one thing more: prepare a guest room for me, because i hope to be restored to you in answer to your prayers.
jesus sent peter and john, saying, "go and make preparations for us to eat the passover."
when there are many [grubs] which are making whispery  and gurgling, rumbling [sounds], then we split knotched pula palm log and we see many grubs which are squirming.
i tell you that in the same way there will be more rejoicing in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninetynine righteous persons who do not need to repent.
lipstick.
i know your deeds, your hard work and your perseverance. i know that you cannot tolerate wicked people, that you have tested those who claim to be apostles but are not, and have found them false.
to mate with or have sexual relations with someone.
revenge
news of this reached the church in jerusalem, and they sent barnabas to antioch.
so he got up and went to his father. "but while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and was filled with compassion for him; he ran to his son, threw his arms around him and kissed him.
surrounding the throne were twenty-four other thrones, and seated on the thrones were twenty-four elders. they were dressed in white and had crowns of gold on their heads.
persistent person
as for the lawa-an tree, when there is a lump of sap on the lawa-an tree, when it is hardened, that is the pitch which can make a light.
to be in severe pain.
a few days later king agrippa and bernice arrived at caesarea to pay their respects to festus.
the fish hardens when we put it in the freezer.
near the cross of jesus stood his mother, his mother's sister, mary the wife of clopas, and mary magdalene.
peace to you. the friends here send their greetings. greet the friends there by name.
and he went back inside the palace. “where do you come from?” he asked jesus, but jesus gave him no answer.
as was the earthly man, so are those who are of the earth; and as is the man from heaven, so also are those who are of heaven.
when we heard this, we and the people there pleaded with paul not to go up to jerusalem.
each of you should look not only to your own interests, but also to the interests of others.
still other seed fell on good soil, where it produced a crop—a hundred, sixty or thirty times what was sown.
binding on a bolo scabbard.
break off spontaneously
making the most of every opportunity, because the days are evil.
he touched her hand and the fever left her, and she got up and began to wait on him.
he who testifies to these things says, "yes, i am coming soon." amen. come, lord jesus.
as jesus and his disciples were leaving jericho, a large crowd followed him.
to break one’s jaw
if he doesn't treat his companion well he will act badly toward him because he will do wrong things to him.
explaining and proving that the messiah had to suffer and rise from the dead. “this jesus i am proclaiming to you is the messiah,” he said.
sit or stand with legs spread out
to be hindered (by clutter)
dwarf
front
a person points out by pointing a finger that there in the mass of twisted vines on the of the branch is where the bees have adhered.
kind of red camote
god, whom i serve in my spirit in preaching the gospel of his son, is my witness how constantly i remember you
a shelter will be built on the raft.
rough, harsh
i’ll hire on with you to go downriver by raft because i don’t have any money now.
if we have a sore in our mouth, we will hold water in our mouth which contains salt.
ear
endure silently
the baby is developing
that is why i did not even consider myself worthy to come to you. but say the word, and my servant will be healed.
but someone may ask, "how are the dead raised? with what kind of body will they come?"
pull bolt back and insert bullets into a gun
then he said to them, "suppose one of you has a friend, and he goes to him at midnight and says, 'friend, lend me three loaves of bread,
christ is the culmination of the law so that there may be righteousness for everyone who believes.
the third time he said to him, “simon son of john, do you love me?” peter was hurt because jesus asked him the third time, “do you love me?” he said, “lord, you know all things; you know that i love you.” jesus said, “feed my sheep.”
but someone will say, "you have faith; i have deeds."
while a large crowd was gathering and people were coming to jesus from town after town, he told this parable:
for certain men whose condemnation was written about long ago have secretly slipped in among you. they are godless men, who change the grace of our god into a license for immorality and deny jesus christ our only sovereign and lord.
by this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another."
there is a [type of] swelling which does not have a head [lit. eye]. that is a blind boil which gets very large and is a difficult kind of illness which people have.
that is what remains
if [one is] in kapugi, the water rises. in respect to trees which replace their leaves, they shed.
the skin of something like a snake which is periodically shed
fine salt
he has helped his servant israel, remembering to be merciful to abraham and his descendants forever, just as he promised our ancestors.”
david calls him 'lord.' how then can he be his son?"
to be incomplete, unfinished, or stunted in growth
that [kind] of attraction isn’t bad because when we see a girl and we like her (lit. have breath toward her), yet later on we will be shy to say that we like her. our attraction isn’t a means of attraction to for doing (lit. because we will do) something wrong.
to echo, as a sound.
once when we were going to the place of prayer, we were met by a female slave who had a spirit by which she predicted the future. she earned a great deal of money for her owners by fortune-telling.
he cannot claim it until he has taken it.
when pilate heard this, he brought jesus out and sat down on the judge’s seat at a place known as the stone pavement (which in aramaic is gabbatha).
peter replied, "man, i don't know what you're talking about!" just as he was speaking, the rooster crowed.
to deliberately let
"o unbelieving generation," jesus replied, "how long shall i stay with you? how long shall i put up with you? bring the boy to me."
i tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another woman commits adultery.”
follow a trail
anyway
who, being in very nature god, did not consider equality with god something to be grasped,
by faith in the name of jesus, this man whom you see and know was made strong. it is jesus’ name and the faith that comes through him that has completely healed him, as you can all see.
the inside of a dug-out canoe is hollowed out as it is made.
very truly i tell you, a time is coming and has now come when the dead will hear the voice of the son of god and those who hear will live.
if there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
the commander took the young man by the hand, drew him aside and asked, "what is it you want to tell me?"
to weed as a garden or field.
put away
listen to another parable: there was a landowner who planted a vineyard. he put a wall around it, dug a winepress in it and built a watchtower. then he rented the vineyard to some farmers and went away on a journey.
now to each one the manifestation of the spirit is given for the common good.
reply
but you have insulted the poor. is it not the rich who are exploiting you? are they not the ones who are dragging you into court?
climb up.
“don’t collect any more than you are required to,” he told them.
when evening came, they went out of the city.
by the meekness and gentleness of christ, i appeal to you--i, paul, who am "timid" when face to face with you, but "bold" when away!
you who stood on a log, slipped off
and asked him for letters to the synagogues in damascus, so that if he found any there who belonged to the way, whether men or women, he might take them as prisoners to jerusalem.
you have condemned and murdered innocent men, who were not opposing you.
if the baby (lit. child) in the abdomen has been properly positioned ahead of time, the mother will have it easier when she gives birth.
wither, as a leaf
a dog ran away with it.
"when a strong man, fully armed, guards his own house, his possessions are safe. but when someone stronger attacks and overpowers him, he takes away the armor in which the man trusted and divides up the spoils.
but what did you go out to see? a prophet? yes, i tell you, and more than a prophet.
then the people began to plead with jesus to leave their region.
what you saw was the house.
be carried by the wind or become airborne
but in fact god has arranged the parts in the body, every one of them, just as he wanted them to be.
to go off for a purpose; run an errand
after jesus and his disciples arrived in capernaum, the collectors of the two-drachma temple tax came to peter and asked, “doesn’t your teacher pay the temple tax?”
to cut wood into tiny slivers for starting a fire
flashlight
“come,” he replied, “and you will see.” so they went and saw where he was staying, and they spent that day with him. it was about four in the afternoon.
news about him spread all over syria, and people brought to him all who were ill with various diseases, those suffering severe pain, the demon-possessed, those having seizures, and the paralyzed; and he healed them.
fish traps are aited with camote
i'll shoo the chickens with “saa”.
what you heard from me, keep as the pattern of sound teaching, with faith and love in christ jesus.
i was embraced.
no temptation has seized you except what is common to man. and god is faithful; he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear. but when you are tempted, he will also provide a way out so that you can stand up under it.
go in and out of a ladder
as we have already said, so now i say again: if anybody is preaching to you a gospel other than what you accepted, let them be under god’s curse!
type of song
to repair
but the man who has settled the matter in his own mind, who is under no compulsion but has control over his own will, and who has made up his mind not to marry the virgin—this man also does the right thing.
the leader of a village has political power because he is able to give orders.
the foolish ones said to the wise, ‘give us some of your oil; our lamps are going out.’
jesus replied, “do what you came for, friend.” then the men stepped forward, seized jesus and arrested him.
and the father who sent me has himself testified concerning me. you have never heard his voice nor seen his form,
to rescue us from the hand of our enemies, and to enable us to serve him without fear
if i have a problem, i am not afraid to ask for help.
when they see the purity and reverence of your lives.
the armed band(s) in the past were bad because they killed [people] who had no fault. but the bands of armed warrior(s) today have become groups of good warriors because they now help the soldiers.
here a great number of disabled people used to lie—the blind, the lame, the paralyzed.
fungal disease of the skin
to do something vigorously.
pull the blouse on over my head.
while we wait for the blessed hope-- the glorious appearing of our great god and savior, jesus christ,
and at the ninth hour jesus cried out in a loud voice, "eloi, eloi, lama 1503 sabachthani?"--which means, "my god, my god, why have you forsaken me?"
but the man who had received one bag went off, dug a hole in the ground and hid his master’s money.
neck
for some say, “his letters are weighty and forceful, but in person he is unimpressive and his speaking amounts to nothing.”
pierce
to discern flavor.
if we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done in the beginning is supplanted. and then we are distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish what we started out to do.
"then the master told his servant, 'go out to the roads and country lanes and make them come in, so that my house will be full.
means of defense
acquainted
propagate
step down
i would like to learn just one thing from you: did you receive the spirit by the works of the law, or by believing what you heard?
whatchamacallit
there are also heavenly bodies and there are earthly bodies; but the splendor of the heavenly bodies is one kind, and the splendor of the earthly bodies is another.
“you are the light of the world. a town built on a hill cannot be hidden.
instead, you ought to say, "if it is the lord's will, we will live and do this or that."
indeed
the disciples said to him, “if this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.”
as for that love charm, it is worn as an armband on the arm or worn as a necklace.
so, as the holy spirit says: “today, if you hear his voice,
fetch water
tone, voice quality
down the middle of the great street of the city. on each side of the river stood the tree of life, bearing twelve crops of fruit, yielding its fruit every month. and the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations.
the person who is old cannot manage to walk well because his/her knees hurt.
prepare to attack
next
“no,” said peter, “you shall never wash my feet.” jesus answered, “unless i wash you, you have no part with me.”
to sop up meat juice with camotes
" 'well done, my good servant!' his master replied. 'because you have been trustworthy in a very small matter, take charge of ten cities.'
the man who engages in a honosexual relationship (lit. sleeps together with the same [sex]) does wrong (lit. bad). they behave like their [male] companion is a woman.
the ax is already at the root of the trees, and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.
small hairs
kind of small melon-like fruit.
block or fill in a space.
‘but you, bethlehem, in the land of judah, are by no means least among the rulers of judah; for out of you will come a ruler who will shepherd my people israel.’”
the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped god, who was seated on the throne. and they cried: “amen, hallelujah!”
for if you live according to the flesh, you will die; but if by the spirit you put to death the misdeeds of the body, you will live.
then i saw a lamb, looking as if it had been slain, standing in the center of the throne, encircled by the four living creatures and the elders. he had seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of god sent out into all the earth.
for out of the heart come evil thoughts—murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false testimony, slander.
vigil over
for i tell you i will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of god comes."
what good is it for someone to gain the whole world, and yet lose or forfeit their very self?
however, if you suffer as a christian, do not be ashamed, but praise god that you bear that name.
to cut a field, especially with a bolo
he doesn't wait to be told [to do something].
used of being reunited with the soul
if a person is hungry, he cannot manage to work
if someone borrows five thousand pesos and promises to pay after harvesting corn, but later on, he does not pay.
jesus replied, “not everyone can accept this word, but only those to whom it has been given.
then the men who had been sent returned to the house and found the servant well.
stop judging by mere appearances, and make a right judgment."
finally, brothers, we instructed you how to live in order to please god, as in fact you are living. now we ask you and urge you in the lord jesus to do this more and more.
john’s baptism—where did it come from? was it from heaven, or of human origin?” they discussed it among themselves and said, “if we say, ‘from heaven,’ he will ask, ‘then why didn’t you believe him?’
to pull up, as a weed; pull out by roots.
i feel upset. (lit. my breath hurts.)
kerosene
any kind of hole, if it can hold a lot, it is capacious.
go away for a period to allow for choice
though i myself have reasons for such confidence.
we have different gifts, according to the grace given to each of us. if your gift is prophesying, then prophesy in accordance with your faith;
the person who sows rice seed in his field just sows it evenly so that it will all be the same and there will be none sown thickly.
happy, cheerful; at peace within oneself or with others.
the mystery of the seven stars that you saw in my right hand and of the seven golden lampstands is this: the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.
he was accompanied by nicodemus, the man who earlier had visited jesus at night. nicodemus brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about seventy-five pounds.
fill or plug
i’ll get lonely if they’re slow in returning.
completed
when we are buying something, we look at it carefully.
the man answered, "now that is remarkable! you don't know where he comes from, yet he opened my eyes.
warn a divisive person once, and then warn him a second time. after that, have nothing to do with him.
i've become tired of your conduct of habitual drinking.
the gums of a person, that is where the teeth are attached (lit. sprout).
straight
let us then approach god’s throne of grace with confidence, so that we may receive mercy and find grace to help us in our time of need.
again i declare to every man who lets himself be circumcised that he is obligated to obey the whole law.
the devil said to him, “if you are the son of god, tell this stone to become bread.”
they were delighted to hear this and promised to give him money. so he watched for an opportunity to hand him over.
but they insisted, "he stirs up the people all over judea by his teaching. he started in galilee and has come all the way here."
for god does not show favoritism.
motor; generator; sewing machine
for it is written in the law of moses: “do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.” is it about oxen that god is concerned?
“fellow children of abraham and you god-fearing gentiles, it is to us that this message of salvation has been sent.
sand from beach.
ridgepole
let some of your leaders come with me, and if the man has done anything wrong, they can press charges against him there.”
the only thing they pay attention to is their doing bad
for surely it is not angels he helps, but abraham’s descendants.
besides, they get into the habit of being idle and going about from house to house. and not only do they become idlers, but also busybodies who talk nonsense, saying things they ought not to.
the woman said to him, “sir, give me this water so that i won’t get thirsty and have to keep coming here to draw water.”
the child who is slow to finish what he was given to eat, he is hoarding his food.
now, for the first time, the plane has come to us.
agreed
although in fact it was not jesus who baptized, but his disciples.
abandon
if we measure the jump, we will see who can jump the highest when we leap from a running start.
the reason my husband was murdered was because he was affected by the actions of grandfather. that was the cause of the trouble.
do not allow what you consider good to be spoken of as evil.
but the man who looks intently into the perfect law that gives freedom, and continues to do this, not forgetting what he has heard, but doing it--he will be blessed in what he does.
when the mother of a child goes to weed [her field], she leaves her child in the care of someone else and that person watches over him/her.
sturdy
nicodemus, who had gone to jesus earlier and who was one of their own number, asked,
grow fast
the son of amminadab, the son of ram, the son of hezron, the son of perez, the son of judah,
eat by oneself or to serve oneself
to hammer
for adulterers and perverts, for slave traders and liars and perjurers--and for whatever else is contrary to the sound doctrine
as for the lawa-an tree, when there is a lump of sap on the lawa-an tree, when it is hardened, that is the pitch which can make a light.
i will remove the horse from the village so that it can choose what it will eat. we remove the horse from the village.
a bodyguard.
this is how we know what love is: jesus christ laid down his life for us. and we ought to lay down our lives for our brothers.
going on from that place, he went into their synagogue,
which
a crowd was sitting around him, and they told him, "your mother and brothers are outside looking for you."
opposed to
the jailer woke up, and when he saw the prison doors open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself because he thought the prisoners had escaped.
i came to you in weakness with great fear and trembling.
little known remedy
"but when the tenants saw him, they talked the matter over. 'this is the heir,' they said. 'let's kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.'
slice it crosswise.
shove
on his robe and on his thigh he has this name written: king of kings and lord of lords.
that the rest of mankind may seek the lord, even all the gentiles who bear my name, says the lord, who does these things’—
relationship of one person to many.
lunch
the liver wasn’t cooked by boiling in water lest it would fall apart.
short arm shield
that which took them so long to return was because they did not have any fare with which to return home.
embrace as a sign of affection or reconciliation
so i sent for you immediately, and it was good of you to come. now we are all here in the presence of god to listen to everything the lord has commanded you to tell us.”
joseph, a levite from cyprus, whom the apostles called barnabas (which means “son of encouragement”),
i took the little scroll from the angel’s hand and ate it. it tasted as sweet as honey in my mouth, but when i had eaten it, my stomach turned sour.
every day they continued to meet together in the temple courts. they broke bread in their homes and ate together with glad and sincere hearts,
pilate had a notice prepared and fastened to the cross. it read: jesus of nazareth, the king of the jews.
in the very same way, these dreamers pollute their own bodies, reject authority and slander celestial beings.
squint
sass one’s elders
rise
one begins to make a basket. whatever kind of woven basket, that is the initial stage of weaving a basket.
to go through the motions of waving a chicken before sacrificing it.
what is she paying you?
vines that grow on trees
out of the same mouth come praise and cursing. my brothers, this should not be.
large round cicada, locust
for if the message spoken by angels was binding, and every violation and disobedience received its just punishment,
to exert strength
suffer intense but endurable pain
but if we say, 'from men'...." (they feared the people, for everyone held that john really was a prophet.)
a black bird
sand
comb design
"be quiet!" said jesus sternly. "come out of him!"
the sesame [stems] are turned upside down to let the seeds drop out because the seeds have burst open.
a spirit who watches over the people of a place.
skinny hips!
even so, when you see these things happening, you know that it is near, right at the door.
we bite into and chew off corn, mangos, pangi fruit, papaya and pineapple.
to make into lime
when the discussion of the gathered people was finished, they left for home. there were no people left.
when a chicken is a mother, it goes ahead of its chicks when it scratches as it looks for something to have her offspring eat.
through jesus, therefore, let us continually offer to god a sacrifice of praise--the fruit of lips that confess his name.
what reason do you give for this current theft of yours?
he will put the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.
if concerning a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space [resulting from the lift].
rejoice with those who rejoice; mourn with those who mourn.
kind of tree with red sap resembling blood
he had four unmarried daughters who prophesied.
to raid
then some stood up and gave this false testimony against him:
the child who always cries until daybreak is called a child who predicts bad luck.
to be safe or secure
but they will have to give account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.
this is why “it was credited to him as righteousness.”
the sixth angel poured out his bowl on the great river euphrates, and its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings from the east.
immediately he spoke to them and said, "take courage! it is i. don't be afraid." then he climbed into the boat with them, and the wind died down. they were completely amazed,
the thanksgiving ceremony, that is the beginning of eating rice which is presented to god.  [someone] kills a pig and chickens.
we worship god.
as jesus was coming up out of the water, he saw heaven being torn open and the spirit descending on him like a dove.
if a spring is new, it cannot be stretched because it is very strong. we cannot manage to stretch it.
cotton-like substance from a plant (kapok)
i in them and you in me. may they be brought to complete unity to let the world know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me.
take the bag of gold from him and give it to the one who has ten bags.
partial damming of river to trap fish
to him who overcomes and does my will to the end, i will give authority over the nations-- 'he will rule them with an iron scepter; he will dash them to pieces like pottery' - -just as i have received authority from my father. i will also give him the morning star.
the forming of the pattern, that is the agum.
so they set out and went from village to village, proclaiming the good news and healing people everywhere.
"come, follow me," jesus said, "and i will make you fishers of men." at once they left their nets and followed him.
while they were eating, jesus took bread, gave thanks and broke it, and gave it to his disciples, saying, "take it; this is my body."
gentleness and self-control. against such things there is no law.
for we are members of his body.
but the ship struck a sandbar and ran aground. the bow stuck fast and would not move, and the stern was broken to pieces by the pounding of the surf.
play a kobbiung tune.
begin
"he was made king, however, and returned home. then he sent for the servants to whom he had given the money, in order to find out what they had gained with it.
boil over
mutual
to have small thighs
as the soldiers were about to take paul into the barracks, he asked the commander, "may i say something to you?"
open
if we go downstream by raft then we beach our raft where the water is calm and we don't beach it where at rapids because our raft will be swept away by the current. our raft will be carried by the current if we beach our craft at the rapids.
of
i’ll use your skirts temporarily.
on the contrary, we speak as those approved by god to be entrusted with the gospel. we are not trying to please people but god, who tests our hearts.
something that is read, such as a book.
splatter, as hot grease
anyone who has ears to hear ought to hear
rattan
these men are blemishes at your love feasts, eating with you without the slightest qualm--shepherds who feed only themselves. they are clouds without rain, blown along by the wind; autumn trees, without fruit and uprooted--twice dead.
crowds gathered also from the towns around jerusalem, bringing their sick and those tormented by impure spirits, and all of them were healed.
then jesus went with his disciples to a place called gethsemane, and he said to them, “sit here while i go over there and pray.”
for the foolishness of god is wiser than man's wisdom, and the weakness of god is stronger than man's strength.
they left that place and passed through galilee. jesus did not want anyone to know where they were,
sprinkle
but when he saw many of the pharisees and sadducees coming to where he was baptizing, he said to them: “you brood of vipers! who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
my brothers, if one of you should wander from the truth and someone should bring him back,
look around in all directions as when surprised
we are stringing beads.
"you don't know what you are asking," jesus said. "can you drink the cup i drink or be baptized with the baptism i am baptized with?"
to exchange for a like kind; to replace
if he has done you any wrong or owes you anything, charge it to me.
dove’s call, believed to predict future events
jesus said, "this voice was for your benefit, not mine.
each person should remain in the situation they were in when god called them.
there were many lamps in the upstairs room where we were meeting.
raft
to come into clear view.
a cleared area around a field
dear friends, although i was very eager to write to you about the salvation we share, i felt i had to write and urge you to contend for the faith that was once for all entrusted to the saints.
the mystery that has been kept hidden for ages and generations, but is now disclosed to the saints. to them god has chosen to make known among the gentiles the glorious riches of this mystery, which is christ in you, the hope of glory.
i tell you, on that night two people will be in one bed; one will be taken and the other left.
make lime
there is great value if we obey our father.
but i have a baptism to undergo, and how distressed i am until it is completed!
white-headed when all hairs have turned grey
to be out of breath, breathless
i needed clothes and you clothed me, i was sick and you looked after me, i was in prison and you came to visit me.’
return empty-handed
your
rare type of metal bracelet made by the older people which has indentations as decoration
it is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living god.
the second
"the most important one," answered jesus, "is this: 'hear, o israel, the lord our god, the lord is one.
give relief or aid
make up to or become friends with people
mussed up (as of hair)
goodness gracious that you travelled in the sunshine when it is exceedingly hot!
and exchanged the glory of the immortal god for images made to look like a mortal human being and birds and animals and reptiles.
but peter made him get up. “stand up,” he said, “i am only a man myself.”
this made the jews ask, "will he kill himself? is that why he says, 'where i go, you cannot come'?"
the foolish ones took their lamps but did not take any oil with them.
to play
from the tribe of judah 12,000 were sealed, from the tribe of reuben 12,000, from the tribe of gad 12,000,  from the tribe of asher 12,000, from the tribe of naphtali 12,000, from the tribe of manasseh 12,000,  from the tribe of simeon 12,000, from the tribe of levi 12,000, from the tribe of issachar 12,000,  from the tribe of zebulun 12,000, from the tribe of joseph 12,000, from the tribe of benjamin 12,000.
now you, if you call yourself a jew; if you rely on the law and boast in god;
those who think they know something do not yet know as they ought to know.
so simon peter climbed back into the boat and dragged the net ashore. it was full of large fish, 153, but even with so many the net was not torn.
shout at the thunder and lightning to go away
is the law, therefore, opposed to the promises of god? absolutely not! for if a law had been given that could impart life, then righteousness would certainly have come by the law.
does not the potter have the right to make out of the same lump of clay some pottery for special purposes and some for common use?
noisy
set your minds on things above, not on earthly things.
if someone is stabbed by a raider, the spear will pierce and go through [the body].
for the bread of god is he who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world."
lansones
cheer
for if god did not spare the natural branches, he will not spare you either.
those who belong to christ jesus have crucified the sinful nature with its passions and desires.
when she saw peter warming himself, she looked closely at him. "you also were with that nazarene, jesus," she said.
what did you get?
sour; to have one’s teeth set on edge from a scraping sound.
tentatively ask
(some manuscripts include additional verses here, but they are not in the niv)
“teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the law?”
sometimes you were publicly exposed to insult and persecution; at other times you stood side by side with those who were so treated.
?
plug [cover??] the waterpole.
in the afternoon, the leaves of the baluy are smoothed out and flattened with a corn cob so they can be tightly rolled up.
we are [deliberately] abandoning [our offspring].
“but they will never follow a stranger; in fact, they will run away from him because they do not recognize a stranger’s voice.”
mistake someone for someone else
kind of white rice
nor did he enter heaven to offer himself again and again, the way the high priest enters the most holy place every year with blood that is not his own.
it's on the shelf.
then judas, the one who would betray him, said, “surely you don’t mean me, rabbi?” jesus answered, “you have said so.”
for god, who said, “let light shine out of darkness,” made his light shine in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of god’s glory displayed in the face of christ.
but he gives us more grace. that is why scripture says: "god opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble."
they went and found a colt outside in the street, tied at a doorway. as they untied it,
and jesse the father of king david. david was the father of solomon, whose mother had been uriah’s wife,
a kind of wood which is used in rice fetish.
that is what we call passed down to an offspring. the authority of david, it is passed down to joseph. and the authority of joseph, it is then passed down to/found in jesus.
i tell you, though he will not get up and give him the bread because he is his friend, yet because of the man's boldness he will get up and give him as much as he needs.
to choose or pick out from other objects or people.
if a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
but since you excel in everything—in faith, in speech, in knowledge, in complete earnestness and in the love we have kindled in you—see that you also excel in this grace of giving.
then everyone deserted him and fled.
remove something by pulling it apart or by rmoving nails
then he returned to his disciples and found them sleeping. “couldn’t you men keep watch with me for one hour?” he asked peter.
a container made of bark or bamboo used for carrying unshelled rice.
in her was found the blood of prophets and of the saints, and of all who have been killed on the earth."
they were all baptized into moses in the cloud and in the sea.
“say to daughter zion, ‘see, your king comes to you, gentle and riding on a donkey, and on a colt, the foal of a donkey.’”
the next morning the jews formed a conspiracy and bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink until they had killed paul.
in their greed these teachers will exploit you with stories they have made up. their condemnation has long been hanging over them, and their destruction has not been sleeping.
as he was praying, the appearance of his face changed, and his clothes became as bright as a flash of lightning.
who is wise and understanding among you? let him show it by his good life, by deeds done in the humility that comes from wisdom.
now judas, who betrayed him, knew the place, because jesus had often met there with his disciples.
the rain has stopped.
once again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was let down into the lake and caught all kinds of fish.
make a circle or hoop out of wire or rattan
give us each day our daily bread.
flesh gives birth to flesh, but the spirit gives birth to spirit.
i am blocking that which he is relentlessly pursuing.
wood chips.
be unfocused, as eyes
and they cried out in a loud voice: "salvation belongs to our god, who sits on the throne, and to the lamb."
anyone who receives instruction in the word must share all good things with his instructor.
those who led the way rebuked him and told him to be quiet, but he shouted all the more, “son of david, have mercy on me!”
reddish-yellow hair (person, dog, pig)
but many who heard the message believed; so the number of men who believed grew to about five thousand.
large land snail
kind of banana, long and green
i'll get someone [else] to tell you for me.
and who also told us of your love in the spirit.
if there is food there, there are people to be fed by you.
dwarf
name of a village
so you too should be glad and rejoice with me.
to starve
the ocean swells and ebbs
that which is called a valley in english is a flat area which is between two mountains.
he went down with them and stood on a level place. a large crowd of his disciples was there and a great number of people from all over judea, from jerusalem, and from the coastal region around tyre and sidon,
if we experience swelling which has not yet burst, our lymph nodes here in our groin will hurt.
"well said, teacher," the man replied. "you are right in saying that god is one and there is no other but him.
i know your afflictions and your poverty—yet you are rich! i know about the slander of those who say they are jews and are not, but are a synagogue of satan.
they came to capernaum. when he was in the house, he asked them, "what were you arguing about on the road?"
i have given them the glory that you gave me, that they may be one as we are one:
for if the dead are not raised, then christ has not been raised either.
we are punished justly, for we are getting what our deeds deserve. but this man has done nothing wrong."
when a person dies, [he/she] is buried in the ground.
but my righteous one will live by faith. and if he shrinks back, i will not be pleased with him."
for this reason anyone who speaks in a tongue should pray that he may interpret what he says.
i have a heavy shirt. if someone asks for it i won't give it because i refrain from giving it because it was very expensive for me to buy.
jesus asked the boy's father, "how long has he been like this?"
he said to him, ‘if they do not listen to moses and the prophets, they will not be convinced even if someone rises from the dead.’”
to lie curled up (applies to animals)
to give a partial payment as a deposit
eggplant.
be cursed due to disrespect for elders
and the parts that we think are less honorable we treat with special honor. and the parts that are unpresentable are treated with special modesty
i know your deeds. see, i have placed before you an open door that no one can shut. i know that you have little strength, yet you have kept my word and have not denied my name.
when he came near the place where the road goes down the mount of olives, the whole crowd of disciples began joyfully to praise god in loud voices for all the miracles they had seen:
once more he went away and prayed the same thing.
envy
of them the proverbs are true: "a dog returns to its vomit," and, "a sow that is washed goes back to her wallowing in the mud."
again he prayed, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth produced its crops.
you blind fools! which is greater: the gold, or the temple that makes the gold sacred?
but if that place is abandoned, it will be quiet; there are no more people and no talking that we can hear.
if we have plants which are flowers, we will be careful when we step so that the flowers won't be accidentally stepped on.
you are bringing some strange ideas to our ears, and we would like to know what they mean.”
we have a small child [whose] age is about one year.
to play a tune
i smoked it (meat) so that it wouldn’t get wormy.
let us behave decently, as in the daytime, not in orgies and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and debauchery, not in dissension and jealousy.
become bent or dented, as metal
ashes
but jesus said, “someone touched me; i know that power has gone out from me.”
industrious
when a piglet nurses, it is always pumping the breasts of the mother so that they will fill with milk.
if there is a horse which i will reserve, i will give a pig as a downpayment (lit. that which i [give] ahead of time). that is my guarantee that i have reserved it.
goodness gracious this child who is always crying whose mouth is a cavern.
when the mother of a child goes to weed her field, she leaves her child in the care of someone else and that person watches over him/her.
we always thank god, the father of our lord jesus christ, when we pray for you,
but i will come to you very soon, if the lord is willing, and then i will find out not only how these arrogant people are talking, but what power they have.
at that very hour there was a severe earthquake and a tenth of the city collapsed. seven thousand people were killed in the earthquake, and the survivors were terrified and gave glory to the god of heaven.
there is that which is good to envy, if what our companion is doing is good, that is what we will emulate.
will also transfer to people
through whom also he went and preached to the spirits in prison
the pharisees and some of the teachers of the law who had come from jerusalem gathered around jesus and
liver
my dear children, i write this to you so that you will not sin. but if anybody does sin, we have one who speaks to the father in our defense--jesus christ, the righteous one.
a man called barabbas was in prison with the insurrectionists who had committed murder in the uprising.
elope
send to joppa for simon who is called peter. he is a guest in the home of simon the tanner, who lives by the sea.’
sap
what we rejected was insufficient because he gave us a chick.
call a chicken with "kuru-kuru"
curse
if one is ill and the fever is excessive, his mouth clamps together.
am i now trying to win the approval of human beings, or of god? or am i trying to please people? if i were still trying to please people, i would not be a servant of christ.
at the time that someone was drowned at the pool, there were many who were aware who were weren't able to go to the rescue.
for the holy spirit will teach you at that time what you should say."
baguntaas is the halfway point between valencia and nasuli.
if our breath is soft, we will cry when we see someone who has been wounded because we pity/have compassion on them.
clear the way before
then he told this parable: "a man had a fig tree, planted in his vineyard, and he went to look for fruit on it, but did not find any.
do not put out the spirit's fire;
the law is not based on faith; on the contrary, it says, “the person who does these things will live by them.”
split up
who had not consented to their decision and action. he came from the judean town of arimathea and he was waiting for the kingdom of god.
when there is no more chaff, we cook it.
slippers
grunt
the sixth angel sounded his trumpet, and i heard a voice coming from the horns of the golden altar that is before god
‘heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. what kind of house will you build for me? says the lord. or where will my resting place be?  has not my hand made all these things?’
to be obstructed
to act as a go-between.
“i am the true vine, and my father is the gardener.”
for we know, brothers and sisters loved by god, that he has chosen you,
item of clothing (shirt, pants, dress)
i felt the sting of that centepede which had bitten my foot.
deceive
lumber
when crabs are wrapped in a leaf, we tie them up securely by wrapping a vine around them several times.
to decide, make a decision
with her the kings of the earth committed adultery, and the inhabitants of the earth were intoxicated with the wine of her adulteries.”
smart
a child who was continuously crying because he cried for his mother who was weeding a field, has an illness and headache caused by crying because he is becoming ill.
do something carefully.
jude, a servant of jesus christ and a brother of james, to those who have been called, who are loved by god the father and kept by jesus christ:
anyone who welcomes you welcomes me, and anyone who welcomes me welcomes the one who sent me.
the reason she’s crying is because her younger sibling is hungry.
bounce
bend, as a needle
they replied, "some say john the baptist; others say elijah; and still others, one of the prophets."
bright yellow fruit about the size of an egg
as jesus was getting into the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed begged to go with him.
set
the kampilan is a warrior's knife used to kill people.
if it is serving, then serve; if it is teaching, then teach;
remedy, cure, medicine
the servant’s master took pity on him, canceled the debt and let him go.
dear friend, do not imitate what is evil but what is good. anyone who does what is good is from god. anyone who does what is evil has not seen god.
(all the athenians and the foreigners who lived there spent their time doing nothing but talking about and listening to the latest ideas.)
a person who is cheerful is quick to laugh if he/she sees his/her companion(s). it's like he/she has no worries.
his own full younger sibling.
when the bodies of the grubs wiggle, they likewise squirm
on hearing this, pilate asked if the man was a galilean.
swift
to shed fur, as animals
john's baptism--was it from heaven, or from men?"
become stormy
anything invaded by weevils
develop well, as a plant
"it is written," he said to them, " 'my house will be a house of prayer' ; but you have made it 'a den of robbers.' "
throw a tantrum (adult woman)
jesus entered the temple courts, and, while he was teaching, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him. “by what authority are you doing these things?” they asked. “and who gave you this authority?”
but we do see jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, now crowned with glory and honor because he suffered death, so that by the grace of god he might taste death for everyone.
if there are those in a some village who are under someone's authority, it seems that they are all his subjects.
so the men were sent off and went down to antioch, where they gathered the church together and delivered the letter.
when barnabas and saul had finished their mission, they returned from jerusalem, taking with them john, also called mark.
who, by the power that enables him to bring everything under his control, will transform our lowly bodies so that they will be like his glorious body.
then jesus said to the chief priests, the officers of the temple guard, and the elders, who had come for him, "am i leading a rebellion, that you have come with swords and clubs?
i’ll collect the payment for my dried fish of a long time ago.
"who are you?" they asked.
fellow israelites, i can tell you confidently that the patriarch david died and was buried, and his tomb is here to this day.   but he was a prophet and knew that god had promised him on oath that he would place one of his descendants on his throne.  seeing what was to come, he spoke of the resurrection of the messiah, that he was not abandoned to the realm of the dead, nor did his body see decay.
but when you give a banquet, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind,
need
those who had seen it told the people how the demon-possessed man had been cured.
jesus said to him, “away from me, satan! for it is written: ‘worship the lord your god, and serve him only.’”
then one of the elders said to me, "do not weep! see, the lion of the tribe of judah, the root of david, has triumphed. he is able to open the scroll and its seven seals."
when the mother of a child goes to weed her field, she leaves her child in the care of someone else and that person watches over him/her.
to climb a mountain
you have taken up the tabernacle of molek and the star of your god rephan, the idols you made to worship. therefore i will send you into exile’ beyond babylon.
those who accepted his message were baptized, and about three thousand were added to their number that day.
therefore, since we have such a hope, we are very bold.
tree with rough leaves used like sandpaper
if there is thin material, we can see through it because the light goes through it.
and then elena hurried [to put up] the mosquito net and then i got inside so that i would not be stung.
instead he went out and began to talk freely, spreading the news. as a result, jesus could no longer enter a town openly but stayed outside in lonely places. yet the people still came to him from everywhere.
as for the sight of my eyes, i cannot see clearly.
we know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time.
who had come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. those troubled by impure spirits were cured,
she wasn't paying attention to eating. water was the only thing left [that] she was drinking.
when they saw him, they worshiped him; but some doubted.
large wart
river
there was a person whose toes we touching and connected. to each other.
stop over
rainbow
and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge in the image of its creator.
even though we warned [that person] not to go to his field to fetch something for them to eat because there was a strong warning, he went anyway and was hit by the raiders. he was shot.
if there are two people who are going downriver by raft and one goes ahead of the other, the one left behind will chase the one which got ahead and will catch up with him.
then death and hades were thrown into the lake of fire. the lake of fire is the second death.
for he has set a day when he will judge the world with justice by the man he has appointed. he has given proof of this to all men by raising him from the dead."
accidentally step on
the library was what impeded [the flow of] the flooding river
stymied
shadow
then jesus said to his host, "when you give a luncheon or dinner, do not invite your friends, your brothers or relatives, or your rich neighbors; if you do, they may invite you back and so you will be repaid.
some people are like seed along the path, where the word is sown. as soon as they hear it, satan comes and takes away the word that was sown in them.
these things happened to them as examples and were written down as warnings for us, on whom the fulfillment of the ages has come.
the next day as they were leaving bethany, jesus was hungry.
plunge your spears into the pig, too.
they cut the meat up and divided it between themselves, and then they had the person who carried the pig on his back take the head for himself.
you’re always lying to us.
adhere to
to harvest
beg camotes from apusow.
the one who sent me is with me; he has not left me alone, for i always do what pleases him."
then i remembered what the lord had said: ‘john baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the holy spirit.’
than
no one who lives in him keeps on sinning. no one who continues to sin has either seen him or known him.
above the ark were the cherubim of the glory, overshadowing the atonement cover. but we cannot discuss these things in detail now.
therefore jesus no longer moved about publicly among the jews. instead he withdrew to a region near the desert, 1596 to a village called ephraim, where he stayed with his disciples.
take along
escape
john answered them all, “i baptize you with water. but one who is more powerful than i will come, the straps of whose sandals i am not worthy to untie. he will baptize you with the holy spirit and fire.
i am not saying this because i am in need, for i have learned to be content whatever the circumstances.
how much each? or how many?
nothing is missing
cross-like symbol used as a field marker
“lord,” they answered, “we want our sight.”
sharpener, as for a pencil
and you, capernaum, will you be lifted to the heavens? no, you will go down to hades. for if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in sodom, it would have remained to this day.
bachelor.
i’ll plant millet and corn the day the field is burnt.
on the eighth day, when it was time to circumcise the child, he was named jesus, the name the angel had given him before he was conceived.
for since in the wisdom of god the world through its wisdom did not know him, god was pleased through the foolishness of what was preached to save those who believe.
isaiah cries out concerning israel: “though the number of the israelites be like the sand by the sea, only the remnant will be saved.
for the one in authority is god’s servant for your good. but if you do wrong, be afraid, for rulers do not bear the sword for no reason. they are god’s servants, agents of wrath to bring punishment on the wrongdoer.
but eagerly desire the greater gifts. and now i will show you the most excellent way.
to think about something; consider, ponder
i want men everywhere to lift up holy hands in prayer, without anger or disputing.
chip off
what do you think?” “he is worthy of death,” they answered.
plunder
nobody has ever heard of opening the eyes of a man born blind.
immediately jesus made his disciples get into the boat and go on ahead of him to bethsaida, while he dismissed the crowd.
and so john came, baptizing in the desert region and preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
arrow
yellow
floor joists
“we know he is our son,” the parents answered, “and we know he was born blind.”
then jesus said to his disciples, “whoever wants to be my disciple must deny themselves and take up their cross and follow me.
fall head over heels
place close together
we [sleep in] opposite directions.
wear sandals but not an extra tunic.
not many of you should presume to be teachers, my brothers, because you know that we who teach will be judged more strictly.
the dove glimpses us.
use up all of something
a kind of hardwood tree with small leaves which are used to bathe a baby.
a horse [tries] to throw the one who has mounted it so that we will fall off.
an amount of prepared slices of something
and to wait for his son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead—jesus, who rescues us from the coming wrath.
who through faith conquered kingdoms, administered justice, and gained what was promised; who shut the mouths of lions,
but i have had god's help to this very day, and so i stand here and testify to small and great alike. i am saying nothing beyond what the prophets and moses said would happen--
the ax is already at the root of the trees, and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire.”
so also, when we were underage, we were in slavery under the elemental spiritual forces of the world.
or do you show contempt for the riches of his kindness, forbearance and patience, not realizing that god’s kindness is intended to lead you to repentance?
john replied in the words of isaiah the prophet, “i am the voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘make straight the way for the lord.’”
because the lord disciplines those he loves, and he punishes everyone he accepts as a son."
we are procrastinating our waking up because we are lazy to get up.
if we see someone to whom we are related (lit. companion) whom we have not yet met, we feel confident toward him. we feel an openness [between us]. we are able to trust him.
but he said to me, “my grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness.” therefore i will boast all the more gladly about my weaknesses, so that christ’s power may rest on me.
so he called one of the servants and asked him what was going on.
despise
the word ngadngad means “press and rub against,” which happens when a bolo is pressed against a sharpening stone.
the men of nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of jonah, and now one greater than jonah is here.
the brothers at lystra and iconium spoke well of him.
carp fish don’t give birth to multiple offspring until the moon comes out.
if there is a jeep which is broken down which need sto be taken to the shop to be repaired, it is also pulled by another jeep.
kind of fish
girlfriend or boyfriend
there was a violent earthquake, for an angel of the lord came down from heaven and, going to the tomb, rolled back the stone and sat on it.
then paul said to the centurion and the soldiers, "unless these men stay with the ship, you cannot be saved."
on hearing it, many of his disciples said, "this is a hard teaching. who can accept it?"
the piglet butts up against the tits so that the milk will become greater.
swift
palm wood from palm trees
large water leech
to withdraw to eat something alone
in damascus there was a disciple named ananias. the lord called to him in a vision, “ananias!” “yes, lord,” he answered.
"let's not tear it," they said to one another. "let's decide by lot who will get it." this happened that the scripture might be fulfilled which said, "they divided my garments among them and cast lots for my clothing." so this is what the soldiers did.
he replied, “go into the city to a certain man and tell him, ‘the teacher says: my appointed time is near. i am going to celebrate the passover with my disciples at your house.’”
so they gathered them and filled twelve baskets with the pieces of the five barley loaves left over by those who had eaten.
discern
the field is the world, and the good seed stands for the people of the kingdom. the weeds are the people of the evil one,
the alag nut is astringent when we chew it. it is used to stop bleeding if someone has been cut.
at once the man was cured; he picked up his mat and walked. the day on which this took place was a sabbath,
but they seized him, beat him and sent him away empty-handed.
and i saw an angel standing in the sun, who cried in a loud voice to all the birds flying in midair, "come, gather together for the great supper of god,
who through faith are shielded by god’s power until the coming of the salvation that is ready to be revealed in the last time.
become alienated to the extent of refusing to speak
the thick cloud which is dark is a thunder cloud.
the other guests began to say among themselves, “who is this who even forgives sins?”
one of them, the disciple whom jesus loved, was reclining next to him.
to take care of someone left behind
god is not unjust; he will not forget your work and the love you have shown him as you have helped his people and continue to help them.
i am confident in the lord that you will take no other view. the one who is throwing you into confusion will pay the penalty, whoever he may be.
any kind of brace whether on a house or piece of furniture
for john came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘he has a demon.’
let's gather closely together. we will listen to what the leader will say.
peter said to him, "we have left everything to follow you!"
to be able to manage
we were therefore buried with him through baptism into death in order that, just as christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the father, we too may live a new life.
and after she had said this, she went back and called her sister mary aside. "the teacher is here," she said, "and is asking for you."
i am the living bread that came down from heaven. if anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. this bread is my flesh, which i will give for the life of the world."
find people absent when visiting
when he came out, he could not speak to them. they realized he had seen a vision in the temple, for he kept making signs to them but remained unable to speak.
penetrate
they preached the gospel in that city and won a large number of disciples. then they returned to lystra, iconium and antioch,
just then a woman who had been subject to bleeding for twelve years came up behind him and touched the edge of his cloak.  she said to herself, “if i only touch his cloak, i will be healed.”
sometimes the material which is waved is placed over the shoulder when dancing or the two pieces of material or the ends held at the waist.
withdraw alone
his disciples stared at one another, at a loss to know which of them he meant.
clanmate
the angry person, vented his anger; he went right ahead and spoke. he spoke loudly because we are taken by surprise.
he/she is easily upset.
when she poured this perfume on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.
the man who had received five bags of gold went at once and put his money to work and gained five bags more.
now john's disciples and the pharisees were fasting. some people came and asked jesus, "how is it that john's disciples and the disciples of the pharisees are fasting, but yours are not?"
then the crowd there turned on sosthenes the synagogue leader and beat him in front of the proconsul; and gallio showed no concern whatever.
butterfly; moth
and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge in the image of its creator.
for i see that you are full of bitterness and captive to sin.”
for the kingdom of god is not a matter of eating and drinking, but of righteousness, peace and joy in the holy spirit,
"still another said, 'i just got married, so i can't come.
discharge from infected eyes
soak out poisonous sap before cooking
eraser
spirit which claims ownership of mountains, baliti trees, cliffs and waterfalls; familiar spirits
this is the passage of scripture the eunuch was reading: “he was led like a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before its shearer is silent, so he did not open his mouth.
in the future.
then the commander said, "i had to pay a big price for my citizenship." "but i was born a citizen," paul replied.
if the accusation is true that a person has done wrong, they will pay up front for the settlement of one who has sinned.
coconut ladle, large wooden spoon
taganay has gotten fat.
choke
yet these men speak abusively against whatever they do not understand; and what things they do understand by instinct, like unreasoning animals--these are the very things that destroy them.
fingernail
likewise
blow (with breath)
be affected by a dove’s call
moreover, as you philippians know, in the early days of your acquaintance with the gospel, when i set out from macedonia, not one church shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving, except you only;
extra
in the same way your father in heaven is not willing that any of these little ones should perish.
if there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
the pattern formed during the initial stage of weaving a basket.
open
and anyone who does not carry his cross and follow me cannot be my disciple.
each of us should please our neighbors for their good, to build them up.
the person who is slow to get out of breath is the one who will swim deeply underwater in a deep pool.
light rain of short duration.
how shall we escape if we ignore such a great salvation? this salvation, which was first announced by the lord, was confirmed to us by those who heard him.
to take over this apostolic ministry, which judas left to go where he belongs.”
have someone treat you because this ailment is [from] witchcraft.
to manage; with negative, not to be able to manage or resolve some situation.
tiny bird
if you, then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your father in heaven give good gifts to those who ask him!
i'm going to pick a house that is wider if it has no people living in it.
then they cast lots, and the lot fell to matthias; so he was added to the eleven apostles.
to have small thighs
after ten minutes the bleeding stopped.
when two days of  [this] process has been completed, finally that agkud can be eaten.
jesus used this figure of speech, but the pharisees did not understand what he was telling them.
he got up, took his mat and walked out in full view of them all. this amazed everyone and they praised god, saying, "we have never seen anything like this!"
but the one who is rich should take pride in his low position, because he will pass away like a wild flower.
to become divided into parts.
anything
and if they do not persist in unbelief, they will be grafted in, for god is able to graft them in again.
those who had arrested jesus took him to caiaphas the high priest, where the teachers of the law and the elders had assembled.
crowds gathered also from the towns around jerusalem, bringing their sick and those tormented by impure spirits, and all of them were healed.
when a pig is caught in a pig trap, the trigger is released and the wild pig is pierced.
the apostles gathered around jesus and reported to him all they had done and taught.
sprained
the people who short-cut from tagasan travel up the mountain, traverse the summit, and descend as they go downhill to maambago.
steady rain
epaphras, my fellow prisoner in christ jesus, sends you greetings.
but i tell you that anyone who is angry with a brother or sister will be subject to judgment. again, anyone who says to a brother or sister, ‘raca,’ is answerable to the court. and anyone who says, ‘you fool!’ will be in danger of the fire of hell.
brothers, we do not want you to be ignorant about those who fall asleep, or to grieve like the rest of men, who have no hope.
so they took away the stone. then jesus looked up and said, "father, i thank you that you have heard me.
rap with knuckles
at the time that someone was drowned at the pool, there were many who were aware who were weren't able to go to the rescue. they were stymied and unable to move.
refuge
slither, as a snake or a creeping vine
jesus said, "for judgment i have come into this world, so that the blind will see and those who see will become blind."
to sing to an accompaniment
for i will forgive their wickedness and will remember their sins no more."
bold, unabashed
to hollow out a tree
but since we belong to the day, let us be sober, putting on faith and love as a breastplate, and the hope of salvation as a helmet.
when the twin-engine airplane flies, its wheels retract.
a horse [tries] to throw the one who has mounted it so that we will fall off.
to set, as of the sun
reflect on what i am saying, for the lord will give you insight into all this.
tree roots used for planting.
when i fuel [a fire] with wood and the fire becomes hot (it is alive), it is flaming.
mutter under one's breath, grumble
you’re bossy
"i tell you," he replied, "if they keep quiet, the stones will cry out."
faded in color
on side of
he will stop by and pick up
do not be anxious about anything, but in everything, by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving, present your requests to god.
a person says, “why is this fense [here]” we will reply, “we have sectioned it off for seed
a kind of red rice.
simeon took him in his arms and praised god, saying:
stilts.
because you are his sons, god sent the spirit of his son into our hearts, the spirit who calls out, “abba, father.”
enter
to approach someone
just as he was speaking, judas, one of the twelve, appeared. with him was a crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests, the teachers of the law, and the elders.
since what may be known about god is plain to them, because god has made it plain to them.
search
don’t go alone, because there are many raiders.
supper
as for the sun, it produces (lit. gives) rays of light.
doubt
leaving that place, jesus withdrew to the region of tyre and sidon.
if one of you says to him, "go, i wish you well; keep warm and well fed," but does nothing about his physical needs, what good is it?
these are the names of the twelve apostles: first, simon (who is called peter) and his brother andrew; james son of zebedee, and his brother john;
jesus answered him, “simon, i have something to tell you.” “tell me, teacher,” he said.
long straight knife (metal inside, wood handle)
in the sight of god, who gives life to everything, and of christ jesus, who while testifying before pontius pilate made the good confession, i charge you  to keep this command without spot or blame until the appearing of our lord jesus christ,
now listen, you who say, "today or tomorrow we will go to this or that city, spend a year there, carry on business and make money."
nervously move one's foot
you study the scriptures diligently because you think that in them you have eternal life. these are the very scriptures that testify about me,
very far away
measles
as for the flesh of large fish, the bones can be filleted; the bones are removed.
his neighbors and those who had formerly seen him begging asked, “isn’t this the same man who used to sit and beg?”
the only thing that is left
slices
and this is his command: to believe in the name of his son, jesus christ, and to love one another as he commanded us.
then they asked him, "what did he do to you? how did he open your eyes?"
fish net
we moved along the coast with difficulty and came to a place called fair havens, near the town of lasea.
influenza.
he himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, so that we might die to sins and live for righteousness; by his wounds you have been healed.
a small white crayfish.
do you not know, brothers and sisters—for i am speaking to those who know the law—that the law has authority over someone only as long as that person lives?
for my eyes have seen your salvation,
4when i saw that they were not acting in line with the truth of the gospel, i said to peter in front of them all, "you are a jew, yet you live like a gentile and not like a jew. how is it, then, that you force gentiles to follow jewish customs?
yes, and i ask you, loyal yokefellow, help these women who have contended at my side in the cause of the gospel, along with clement and the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
book
“how can this be?” nicodemus asked.
if he comes suddenly, do not let him find you sleeping.
and declared, “this fellow said, ‘i am able to destroy the temple of god and rebuild it in three days.’”
jesus turned and said to peter, “get behind me, satan! you are a stumbling block to me; you do not have in mind the concerns of god, but merely human concerns.”
wooden hoe-like instrument
the meaning is uncluttered, straight and our understanding [of the words] is clear.
we were still foolish. as for us, we did not yet have knowledge. we had not yet discovered the good path.
adaw was slashed with a bolo.
the people have a good relationship because they share with each other whenever they have something to eat
the glory and honor of the nations will be brought into it.
shake one’s head
become smaller, as a sore that is healing
at daybreak they entered the temple courts, as they had been told, and began to teach the people. when the high priest and his associates arrived, they called together the sanhedrin—the full assembly of the elders of israel—and sent to the jail for the apostles.
help me pound the rice.
everyone who has this hope in him purifies himself, just as he is pure.
if the [other person] agrees, you will make the purchase transaction.
forbid
it still remains that some will enter that rest, and those who formerly had the gospel preached to them did not go in, because of their disobedience.
when neither sun nor stars appeared for many days and the storm continued raging, we finally gave up all hope of being saved.
consequently, faith comes from hearing the message, and the message is heard through the word about christ.
if the water is lukewarm, it isn't very hot.
see that the windows are shut in case it should rain.
and he gave orders to stop the chariot. then both philip and the eunuch went down into the water, and philip baptized him.
and i heard a loud voice from the throne saying, “look! god’s dwelling place is now among the people, and he will dwell with them. they will be his people, and god himself will be with them and be their god.
to die; to kill
jesus said, "i am with you for only a short time, and then i go to the one who sent me.
his body was refreshed. he was satisfying his body in the water.
but jesus asked him, "judas, are you betraying the son of man with a kiss?"
but john tried to deter him, saying, “i need to be baptized by you, and do you come to me?”
to miss someone a lot
god is patient.
if a child gets sick who is always bathing [in the river], the older people say that he afflicted by an evil spirit because he was affected by a long-haired spirit [which lives in the water].
to curse
when there are those traveling, we feel rushed as they are leaving.
the world cannot hate you, but it hates me because i testify that its works are evil.
jesus wept.
wrinkled (as of clothing)
peter followed him at a distance, right into the courtyard of the high priest. there he sat with the guards and warmed himself at the fire.
reciprocate
a large, fat red shrimp with small claws.
he will cut him to pieces and assign him a place with the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
fish’s tail
he will not be strong unless he is playing.
wrap tightly around something
for through the law i died to the law so that i might live for god.
doubtful
if someone is ill, that is the person over which a shaman will perform a pig sacrifice.
prepare
eat up
the losok snake has a mottled pattern to its body.
waning moon
we’ll let the water return
but jesus told him, “follow me, and let the dead bury their own dead.”
not by works but by him who calls—she was told, “the older will serve the younger.”
but this has all taken place that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled.” then all the disciples deserted him and fled.
a person whose mouth is wide open as he laughs because he is very amused continually happens to grin.
as for those who were held in high esteem—whatever they were makes no difference to me; god does not show favoritism—they added nothing to my message.
paul, an apostle of christ jesus by the will of god, and timothy our brother, to the church of god in corinth, together with all his holy people throughout achaia:
slice or strip mat material.
to climb a mountain
the dog is digging because he is relentlessly pursuing a rat there in a hole in the ground.
if there is a black ant in the food being cooked, we will pick it out with a spoon.
lastborn child
but he answered, "you give them something to eat." they said to him, "that would take eight months of a man's wages ! are we to go and spend that much on bread and give it to them to eat?"
i moved next to father to sleep.
to reciprocate in work
in his right hand he held seven stars, and out of his mouth came a sharp double-edged sword. his face was like the sun shining in all its brilliance.
going a little farther, he fell with his face to the ground and prayed, “my father, if it is possible, may this cup be taken from me. yet not as i will, but as you will.”
‘he will wipe every tear from their eyes. there will be no more death’ or mourning or crying or pain, for the old order of things has passed away.”
"abba, father," he said, "everything is possible for you. take this cup from me. yet not what i will, but what you will."
glimpse
kind of red rice
when we are buying something, we look at it carefully.
if the tongue is clamped down on, it can be severed.
long ago, the old days, the past
then they worshiped him and returned to jerusalem with great joy.
if there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
airplane
but how is it to your credit if you receive a beating for doing wrong and endure it? but if you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before god.
for you have been born again, not of perishable seed, but of imperishable, through the living and enduring word of god.
at once i was in the spirit, and there before me was a throne in heaven with someone sitting on it.
so i strive always to keep my conscience clear before god and man.
does not the very nature of things teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a disgrace to him,
but when perfection comes, the imperfect disappears.
break a cooking pot (applies only to a certain type of soft firewood)
if the pot is stumbled over it will spill
lie beside, next to
one of you will say to me: “then why does god still blame us? for who is able to resist his will?”
and he swore by him who lives for ever and ever, who created the heavens and all that is in them, the earth and all that is in it, and the sea and all that is in it, and said, “there will be no more delay!
therefore jesus told them, "my time is not yet here; for you any time will do.
kind of sugarcane.
now, brothers and sisters, if i come to you and speak in tongues, what good will i be to you, unless i bring you some revelation or knowledge or prophecy or word of instruction?
carry on the head
but we preach christ crucified: a stumbling block to jews and foolishness to gentiles,
banana blossom
therefore jesus said again, “very truly i tell you, i am the gate for the sheep.”
with this in mind, we constantly pray for you, that our god may make you worthy of his calling, and that by his power he may bring to fruition your every desire for goodness and your every deed prompted by faith.
and now what are you waiting for? get up, be baptized and wash your sins away, calling on his name.'
to harvest individual plants such as corn or sugarcane by cutting or breaking off the plants.
the second is this: 'love your neighbor as yourself.' there is no commandment greater than these."
name of a small weed
claim
child.
on hearing this, pilate asked if the man was a galilean.
the baliok tree is red and its body is very hard and is used to make axe handles, spear shafts and extensions to a house because it doesn't get holes from the bokbok insect.
love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth.
if my child takes the opportunity to eat at someone else's house without my permission, i will scold him/her.
to procrastinate; prolong or to be slow to do something.
‘look, you scoffers, wonder and perish, for i am going to do something in your days that you would never believe, even if someone told you.’”
although they know god’s righteous decree that those who do such things deserve death, they not only continue to do these very things but also approve of those who practice them.
to dance, turning from side to side; to be strong-willed or disobedient.
round reddish-brown seed of a vine
and do not forget to do good and to share with others, for with such sacrifices god is pleased.
if someone gives the order [for someone] to kill [someone else], he will carry out [the order]
for we know him who said, "it is mine to avenge; i will repay," and again, "the lord will judge his people."
inform
sharpening stone, whetstone
to miscarry
i’ll relate this story/information to you.
nevertheless, each person should live as a believer in whatever situation the lord has assigned to them, just as god has called them. this is the rule i lay down in all the churches.
“i will not leave you as orphans; i will come to you.”
you also, like living stones, are being built into a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood, offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to god through jesus christ.
let’s fill the basket with camotes.
they went across the lake to the region of the gerasenes.
tooth marks
mildew
and we urge you, brothers and sisters, warn those who are idle and disruptive, encourage the disheartened, help the weak, be patient with everyone.
the person who sleeps soundly, will be slow to awaken in the morning.
dry near a fire
when there is something in which brass is placed there on the bottom and sides of a shield, that is that which secures it so that it won't come apart when men fight each other with spears.
kind of red sugarcane
since you call on a father who judges each man's work impartially, live your lives as strangers here in reverent fear.
the men cut the field, working side by side.
caiaphas was the one who had advised the jewish leaders that it would be good if one man died for the people.
any meat or fish that can be eaten; to go fishing; to catch edible water creatures.
a silversmith named demetrius, who made silver shrines of artemis, brought in no little business for the craftsmen.
after he was raised from the dead, his disciples recalled what he had said. then they believed the scripture and the words jesus had spoken.
then jesus went up on a mountainside and sat down with his disciples.
in a similar way, sodom and gomorrah and the surrounding towns gave themselves up to sexual immorality and perversion. they serve as an example of those who suffer the punishment of eternal fire.
i'm going to move to another place.
jesus answered, "it is the one to whom i will give this piece of bread when i have dipped it in the dish." then, dipping the piece of bread, he gave it to judas iscariot, son of simon.
arrive at house to stay; arrive at destination; go to destination; make sure something reaches someone
a kind of hardwood tree with small leaves which are used to bathe a baby.
the lord has done this, and it is marvelous in our eyes' ?"
but with the precious blood of christ, a lamb without blemish or defect.
i have come into the world as a light, so that no one who believes in me should stay in darkness.
kobbiung tune.
burdensome
later, knowing that all was now completed, and so that the scripture would be fulfilled, jesus said, "i am thirsty."
"father, the time has come. glorify your son, that your son may glorify you. for you granted him authority over all people that he might give eter
small bird such as a rice bird
then after three years, i went up to jerusalem to get acquainted with cephas and stayed with him fifteen days.
“but what about you?” he asked. “who do you say i am?” peter answered, “god’s messiah.”
"meanwhile, the older son was in the field. when he came near the house, he heard music and dancing.
for they refreshed my spirit and yours also. such men deserve recognition.
the whole town gathered at the door,
or do you not know that wrongdoers will not inherit the kingdom of god? do not be deceived: neither the sexually immoral nor idolaters nor adulterers nor men who have sex with men
lose
hearing this, jesus said to jairus, “don’t be afraid; just believe, and she will be healed.”
i
well-built
wood chips.
whoever loves his brother lives in the light, and there is nothing in him to make him stumble.
you who stood on a log, slipped off
the tail of a fish
but how then would the scriptures be fulfilled that say it must happen in this way?”
but god turned away from them and gave them over to the worship of the sun, moon and stars. this agrees with what is written in the book of the prophets: ‘did you bring me sacrifices and offerings forty years in the wilderness, people of israel?
walk noisily
thin
so you also, when you have done everything you were told to do, should say, ‘we are unworthy servants; we have only done our duty.’”
the water is murky.
if we live, we live for the lord; and if we die, we die for the lord. so, whether we live or die, we belong to the lord.
the baliok tree is red and its body is very hard and is used to make axe handles, spear shafts and extensions to a house because it doesn't get holes from the bokbok insect.
simon peter motioned to this disciple and said, "ask him which one he means."
when he came back, he again found them sleeping, because their eyes were heavy.
domesticate
the beast and the ten horns you saw will hate the prostitute. they will bring her to ruin and leave her naked; they will eat her flesh and burn her with fire.
?
blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of god.
to swear or vow
they asked her, “woman, why are you crying?” “they have taken my lord away,” she said, “and i don’t know where they have put him.”
then he said to the man, “stretch out your hand.” so he stretched it out and it was completely restored, just as sound as the other.
slash up into pieces
and this was his message: "after me will come one more powerful than i, the thongs of whose sandals i am not worthy to stoop down and untie.
if anyone chooses to do god's will, he will find out whether my teaching comes from god or whether i speak on my own.
kind of soft, fragrant wood similar to mahogany, has a reddish center. it is used to make boats or roof shingles.
forgive
black sugar ant.
the reason for our slowness to purchase the axe is because we will examine it to see whether it has a crack.
hit it when you shoot the arrow.
"crucify him!" they shouted.
but when he asks, he must believe and not doubt, because he who doubts is like a wave of the sea, blown and tossed by the wind.
then seizing him, they led him away and took him into the house of the high priest. peter followed at a distance.
in front of
i don't know.
early in the morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people made their plans how to have jesus executed.
then will appear the sign of the son of man in heaven. and then all the peoples of the earth will mourn when they see the son of man coming on the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.
i have a cold.
when jesus saw him lying there and learned that he had been in this condition for a long time, he asked him, “do you want to get well?”
fat
plant used for fish poison.
if we experience swelling which has not yet burst, our lymph nodes here in our groin will hurt.
andrew, philip, bartholomew, matthew, thomas, james son of alphaeus, thaddaeus, simon the zealot
posterity
a group of people working together
deep wound
on board
their hair was like women's hair, and their teeth were like lions' teeth.
sprout,
jesus said to him, “receive your sight; your faith has healed you.”
i have indeed seen the oppression of my people in egypt. i have heard their groaning and have come down to set them free. now come, i will send you back to egypt.’
(now jesus himself had pointed out that a prophet has no honor in his own country.)
life is more than food, and the body more than clothes.
(some manuscripts include additional verses here, but they are not in the niv)
children, obey your parents in everything, for this pleases the lord.
if any man builds on this foundation using gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay or straw,
so he traveled throughout galilee, preaching in their synagogues and driving out demons.
what could i have done in that [i am] just a woman and so it's hard for me to give life/sustenance to our children who are still small.
playful
to him be the power for ever and ever. amen.
finish
then i saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies gathered together to wage war against the rider on the horse and his army.
a very large crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road.
you leave my things alone.
the cat leans back and over when it summer-salts when it plays with other cats.
a sticky resin
famous.
immature pangi fruit
to set on eggs.
the person who gets provoked, even if what we say is small, will quickly become angry.
any of the manobo people
if we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done in the beginning is supplanted  and then we are distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish what we started out to do.
to ring, as of a bell.
he went after the saw and returned it to me.
a housepost, if it is rotten, we cut it off straight across because we need to remove the rotten part. that is the reason for cutting it off straight across so that it will be straight.
the priest of zeus, whose temple was just outside the city, brought bulls and wreaths to the city gates because he and the crowd wanted to offer sacrifices to them.
unlike so many, we do not peddle the word of god for profit. on the contrary, in christ we speak before god with sincerity, as those sent from god.
fly up and over the earth
i have labored and toiled and have often gone without sleep; i have known hunger and thirst and have often gone without food; i have been cold and naked.
now when i went to troas to preach the gospel of christ and found that the lord had opened a door for me,
but god, who comforts the downcast, comforted us by the coming of titus,
when they had passed through amphipolis and apollonia, they came to thessalonica, where there was a jewish synagogue.
by no means! we are those who have died to sin; how can we live in it any longer?
if [you] feel unsafe, leave together now for maambao because it is a time to be alert for raiders for a while.
why, you do not even know what will happen tomorrow. what is your life? you are a mist that appears for a little while and then vanishes.
mature
long straight knife (metal inside, wood handle)
watch the child if you have him stand because he will plop down.
but paul shook the snake off into the fire and suffered no ill effects.
once again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net that was let down into the lake and caught all kinds of fish.
upriver
i long to see you so that i may impart to you some spiritual gift to make you strong—
fear of heights; fear of falling from height
don’t be in physical contact with me because you will catch my illness.
as he approached the town gate, a dead person was being carried out—the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. and a large crowd from the town was with her.
fare
even as he spoke, many put their faith in him.
when you fish with a spear, you watch for the silver-colored fish when it is still far away. when it passes near, you spear it as you jab/thrust at it.
was caught up to paradise and heard inexpressible things, things that no one is permitted to tell.
i do not say this to condemn you; i have said before that you have such a place in our hearts that we would live or die with you.
paul, a servant of god and an apostle of jesus christ to further the faith of god’s elect and their knowledge of the truth that leads to godliness—
end or limit
he who did not spare his own son, but gave him up for us all—how will he not also, along with him, graciously give us all things?
to one's left
to become night
awaken
then they remembered his words.
an armband used as a charm.
the child’s choking on the milk.
it is a fat head [of grain].
stop
chubby
i won’t give to you because there isn’t enough for one each.
graze, as spear or bullet
stiff,
jesus said to them, “come and have breakfast.” none of the disciples dared ask him, “who are you?” they knew it was the lord.
when i fuel [a fire] with wood and the fire becomes hot, it flames.
everything they do is done for people to see: they make their phylacteries wide and the tassels on their garments long;
as for a chicken which is ill, its comb darkens.
a type of tree
straighten bones, adjust bones, massage.
and so i tell you, every kind of sin and slander can be forgiven, but blasphemy against the spirit will not be forgiven.
slice thinly
i hope you will put up with a little of my foolishness; but you are already doing that.
i’m your housegirl.
slide the comb between the shingles
give something for free
examine
held up
then jesus told them, “this very night you will all fall away on account of me, for it is written: ‘i will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’
so i say, live by the spirit, and you will not gratify the desires of the sinful nature.
wave of the sea
whoever has ears, let them hear.
busy
i'll get up enough energy [to go check on] my pig trap.
no more
“i have revealed you to those whom you gave me out of the world. they were yours; you gave them to me and they have obeyed your word.”
but they did not understand what he was saying to them.
therefore this generation will be held responsible for the blood of all the prophets that has been shed since the beginning of the world,
to habitually visit other homes so that one becomes a bother
it’s already used up
dark spot on baby’s sacroiliac.
winnowing tray
the disciples, as each one was able, decided to provide help for the brothers and sisters living in judea.
pour
to ring, as of a bell.
wives, in the same way be submissive to your husbands so that, if any of them do not believe the word, they may be won over without words by the behavior of their wives,
“woman, why do you involve me?” jesus replied. “my hour has not yet come.”
for this reason they tried all the more to kill him; not only was he breaking the sabbath, but he was even calling god his own father, making himself equal with god.
anyone you forgive, i also forgive. and what i have forgiven—if there was anything to forgive—i have forgiven in the sight of christ for your sake,
she will give birth to a son, and you are to give him the name jesus, because he will save his people from their sins.”
you see that a person is justified by what he does and not by faith alone.
memories of someone will be brought back and we will feel very sad .
fitting
if he scoots, it is just one short motion.
grab
slippery
no, not, don’t (non-past negative)
he is not here; he has risen! remember how he told you, while he was still with you in galilee:
to become dry, as weather
rejoice with those who rejoice; mourn with those who mourn.
and beginning with moses and all the prophets, he explained to them what was said in all the scriptures concerning himself.
shoots of plants
it doesn't matter that it is small.
on herod’s birthday the daughter of herodias danced for the guests and pleased herod so much
“return home and tell how much god has done for you.” so the man went away and told all over town how much jesus had done for him.
then they made jason and the others post bond and let them go.
barnabas wanted to take john, also called mark, with them,
buntit has a lot of clothing.
even though my illness was a trial to you, you did not treat me with contempt or scorn. instead, you welcomed me as if i were an angel of god, as if i were christ jesus himself.
yet they could not find any way to do it, because all the people hung on his words.
when we look down at someone, we are continually seeing the person but we don't let him see us so that we will not be recognized.
because a will is in force only when somebody has died; it never takes effect while the one who made it is living.
grip tightly
the angel answered, “the holy spirit will come on you, and the power of the most high will overshadow you. so the holy one to be born will be called the son of god.
bomb; spray
to wrap oneself (in blanket)
they all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
always making noise (as with a jew’s harp)
david says the same thing when he speaks of the blessedness of the one to whom god credits righteousness apart from works:
like sarah, who obeyed abraham and called him her lord. you are her daughters if you do what is right and do not give way to fear.
as a prisoner for the lord, then, i urge you to live a life worthy of the calling you have received.
if it is the decision of the fathr and mother that you make them [part of] your family, they are no longer strangers; [they are] member(s) [of your family]
they were trampled in the winepress outside the city, and blood flowed out of the press, rising as high as the horses' bridles for a distance of 1,600 stadia.
which is easier: to say, ‘your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘get up and walk’?
john’s disciples came and took his body and buried it. then they went and told jesus.
to experience something
to curl up
tasteless, flavorless
through whom we have gained access by faith into this grace in which we now stand. and we boast in the hope of the glory of god.
if i give all i possess to the poor and give over my body to hardship that i may boast, but do not have love, i gain nothing.
jesus replied, "man, who appointed me a judge or an arbiter between you?"
for whatever is hidden is meant to be disclosed, and whatever is concealed is meant to be brought out into the open.
if the whole body were an eye, where would the sense of hearing be? if the whole body were an ear, where would the sense of smell be?
a child cries for her if he is searching for his mother.
wherever the middle of the earth is, that is the center.
this man lived in the tombs, and no one could bind him any more, not even with a chain. for he had often been chained hand and foot, but he tore the chains apart and broke the irons on his feet. no one was strong enough to subdue him.
at that time if anyone says to you, 'look, here is the christ !' or, 'look, there he is!' do not believe it.
slicer
chignon
a large, multicolored poisonous snake.
for this reason god sends them a powerful delusion so that they will believe the lie
then the detachment of soldiers with its commander and the jewish officials arrested jesus. they bound him
pray also for me, that whenever i open my mouth, words may be given me so that i will fearlessly make known the mystery of the gospel,
the person who was the leader of a certain place received a written warning which said, "tell your subjects not to go to the outposts because the soldiers will be coming upriver to see the villages."
the people who had ridden the jeep that crashed with another vehicle were caught in a disaster they did not foresee.
brother of a girl; male cousin.
by a new and living way opened for us through the curtain, that is, his body,
if it sinks to the bottom, it goes to the bottom of the water/river.
when we plant camote stem cuttings, we get a sharpened stick which we use to dig that in which we will plant stems.
when the single length of bamboo is pulled up, if it is full of earth, its sign is good because the rice will be plentiful.
safety pin
i pray that out of his glorious riches he may strengthen you with power through his spirit in your inner being,
jesus was in the centre of the throng.
blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
try clothing on someone
if anyone is worried that he might not be acting honorably toward the virgin he is engaged to, and if his passions are too strong and he feels he ought to marry, he should do as he wants. he is not sinning. they should get married.
at the sixth hour darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour.
to cross
grasshopper
what i am carrying suspended is lightweight.
then how is it that each of us hears them in our native language?
but these men blaspheme in matters they do not understand. they are like brute beasts, creatures of instinct, born only to be caught and destroyed, and like beasts they too will perish.
it's difficult for us.
reject
to be slim
who gave himself as a ransom for all people. this has now been witnessed to at the proper time.
be careful, however, that the exercise of your rights does not become a stumbling block to the weak.
to be struck, as by light.
herod added this to them all: he locked john up in prison.
step on
“the man runs away because he is a hired hand and cares nothing for the sheep.”
sic chickens on each other
my uncle had [me] point out where to cut.
kind of black rice
for we must all appear before the judgment seat of christ, so that each of us may receive what is due us for the things done while in the body, whether good or bad.
he said: "the jews have agreed to ask you to bring paul before the sanhedrin tomorrow on the pretext of wanting more accurate information about him.
chop down a huge tree
the birds flock together feeding on the fruits of the tree.
just one
for sin, seizing the opportunity afforded by the commandment, deceived me, and through the commandment put me to death.
loose
large abdomen
cloud
come back to your senses as you ought, and stop sinning; for there are some who are ignorant of god--i say this to your shame.
but accepts from every nation the one who fears him and does what is right.
brothers, if i am still preaching circumcision, why am i still being persecuted? in that case the offense of the cross has been abolished.
[it's] our chicken
that was a different kind of threat because she was forced [into marriage].
the children are learning to write.
adaw was slashed with a bolo.
the coming of the lawless one will be in accordance with how satan works. he will use all sorts of displays of power through signs and wonders that serve the lie,
you did not give me a kiss, but this woman, from the time i entered, has not stopped kissing my feet.
be blinded temporarily by brilliance of light
to stand on tiptoe
one of the calls of a white-breasted ubun-ubun dove.
protest loudly.
jesus looked at him and loved him. "one thing you lack," he said. "go, sell everything you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. then come, follow me."
scrape rattan to make tyings.
because the law brings wrath. and where there is no law there is no transgression.
handspan
if we send someone to buy salt then he will come back without delay. after he makes the purchase, he will turn around and come right back.
for anyone who speaks in a tongue does not speak to people but to god. indeed, no one understands them; they utter mysteries by the spirit.
remember this: whoever sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and whoever sows generously will also reap generously.
some of his disciples were remarking about how the temple was adorned with beautiful stones and with gifts dedicated to god. but jesus said,
but what does it matter? the important thing is that in every way, whether from false motives or true, christ is preached. and because of this i rejoice.
grow
large crowds were traveling with jesus, and turning to them he said:
we are being pressured by our leader to hurry so that our work will be finished soon.
i fast twice a week and give a tenth of all i get.’
he who has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says to the churches. to him who overcomes, i will give the right to eat from the tree of life, which is in the paradise of god.
“you may ask me for anything in my name, and i will do it.”
"it is one of the twelve," he replied, "one who dips bread into the bowl with me.
peter said to him, “we have left all we had to follow you!”
fan a fire to make it burn hotter
for many will come in my name, claiming, ‘i am the messiah,’ and will deceive many.
to set aside by itself
if anyone asks you, 'why are you untying it?' tell him, 'the lord needs it.' "
“do not judge, and you will not be judged. do not condemn, and you will not be condemned. forgive, and you will be forgiven.
his father was sick in bed, suffering from fever and dysentery. paul went in to see him and, after prayer, placed his hands on him and healed him.
to pull out as a tooth.
rotten, mushy, decomposed; to rot, to become crumbly
[as for] the person who doesn't believe a warning that there are raiders, [he] will be ensnared by [something] bad because he will be murdered.
all this is evidence that god’s judgment is right, and as a result you will be counted worthy of the kingdom of god, for which you are suffering.
“don’t you believe that i am in the father, and that the father is in me? the words i say to you i do not speak on my own authority. rather, it is the father, living in me, who is doing his work.”
jesus said this to indicate the kind of death by which peter would glorify god. then he said to him, “follow me!”
large tuberous vegetable
shy
what shall we do now?
as for cain, he got his younger sibling off by himself to kill.
mother has a broken limb.
strike
"but his subjects hated him and sent a delegation after him to say, 'we don't want this man to be our king.'
we will begin to cut the field at the bottom of the field.
have someone treat you because this ailment is [from] witchcraft.
to pity, feel sorry for.
festus, wishing to do the jews a favor, said to paul, “are you willing to go up to jerusalem and stand trial before me there on these charges?”
meet from
what then shall we say, brothers? when you come together, everyone has a hymn, or a word of instruction, a revelation, a tongue or an interpretation. all of these must be done for the strengthening of the church.
jesus stopped and said, "call him." so they called to the blind man, "cheer up! on your feet! he's calling you."
overshoot
lift out
now, brothers and sisters, if i come to you and speak in tongues, what good will i be to you, unless i bring you some revelation or knowledge or prophecy or word of instruction?
when the islanders saw the snake hanging from his hand, they said to each other, “this man must be a murderer; for though he escaped from the sea, the goddess justice has not allowed him to live.”
this news about jesus spread throughout judea and the surrounding country.
it’s improbable that we would get it since we’re women.
the eel does not have a tail like a fish which is at the end of its body.
lie around
love song style.
they replied, "believe in the lord jesus, and you will be saved--you and your household."
if one of you says to him, "go, i wish you well; keep warm and well fed," but does nothing about his physical needs, what good is it?
we help a weak person by holding [his/her] hand so that [he/she] will gain the ability to walk so that [he/she] will be able to become ambulatory.
the hearth which is a place where a fire is built, it becomes grey when we cook.
make something deep
how foolish! what you sow does not come to life unless it dies.
share
a tagan, comes from bamboo and is a container for lime.
concave carved side of a kalasag shield.
then he left the crowd and went into the house. his disciples came to him and said, “explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field.”
then god's temple in heaven was opened, and within his temple was seen the ark of his covenant. and there came flashes of lightning, rumblings, peals of thunder, an earthquake and a great hailstorm.
jesus replied, "if anyone loves me, he will obey my teaching. my father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him.
when jesus saw that a crowd was running to the scene, he rebuked the evil spirit. "you deaf and mute spirit," he said, "i command you, come out of him and never enter him again."
when an impure spirit comes out of a person, it goes through arid places seeking rest and does not find it.
and when you stand praying, if you hold anything against anyone, forgive him, so that your father in heaven may forgive you your sins."
if it is pounded, a can will become crushed.
still others asked, "how can the christ come from galilee? does not the scripture say that the christ will come from david's family and from bethlehem, the town where david lived?"
and pray in the spirit on all occasions with all kinds of prayers and requests. with this in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for all the saints.
deeply affected
and i heard a sound from heaven like the roar of rushing waters and like a loud peal of thunder. the sound i heard was like that of harpists playing their harps.
it is difficult if we are the recipients of someone's angry outburst.
peck
and i know that this man—whether in the body or apart from the body i do not know, but god knows—
“no one, sir,” she said. “then neither do i condemn you,” jesus declared. “go now and leave your life of sin.”
the jews said to one another, "where does this man intend to go that we cannot find him? will he go where our people live scattered among the greeks, and teach the greeks?
and even the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
they love to be greeted with respect in the marketplaces and to be called ‘rabbi’ by others.
there is a person who has a snack of bread and he gets peanut [butter] which he spreads back and forth on it so that it will taste good
to do something vigorously.
soul
to use something as treatment or medicine
therefore, holy brothers, who share in the heavenly calling, fix your thoughts on jesus, the apostle and high priest whom we confess.
but the people of israel, who pursued the law as the way of righteousness, have not attained their goal.
as they stretched him out to flog him, paul said to the centurion standing there, "is it legal for you to flog a roman citizen who hasn't even been found guilty?"
to touch and lick fingers
pointer
use something with which to pick up something else
now jesus’ mother and brothers came to see him, but they were not able to get near him because of the crowd.
wart
hair done
tropical ulcer
doubt
by the same word the present heavens and earth are reserved for fire, being kept for the day of judgment and destruction of the ungodly.
and the news about him spread throughout the surrounding area.
“but to you who are listening i say: love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
if it is serving, then serve; if it is teaching, then teach;
until i come, devote yourself to the public reading of scripture, to preaching and to teaching.
and if by grace, then it cannot be based on works; if it were, grace would no longer be grace.
why?
i was not able to restrain my anger at that person.
then he called the crowd to him along with his disciples and said: "if anyone would come after me, he must deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.
you were’nt recognized because your mouth was swollen.
dizzy
when we motivate a child to sweep, we hand him a broom so that he will learn.
care
cluster
clear one’s throat.
he repeatedly takes away the wives of other people
so they answered jesus, “we don’t know.” then he said, “neither will i tell you by what authority i am doing these things.
stray from a path
indeed
powder/dust from woodboring insects
whether it is high or short, thick or thin, if it is in the yard and surrounds a house, it is called a fense.
for you know that we dealt with each of you as a father deals with his own children, encouraging, comforting and urging you to live lives worthy of god, who calls you into his kingdom and glory.
then death and hades were thrown into the lake of fire. the lake of fire is the second death.
truly i tell you, all this will come on this generation.
reduce, as a price
the meaning is unobstructed, correct and our understanding [of the words] is clear.
let the peace of christ rule in your hearts, since as members of one body you were called to peace. and be thankful.
philip answered him, "it would take more than half a year's wages to buy enough bread for each one to have a bite!"
there are [some] people who cannot be relied upon who will pilfer my things.
it doesn't work to sift something wet because it would stick.
“come,” he said. then peter got down out of the boat, walked on the water and came toward jesus.
this went on for two years, so that all the jews and greeks who lived in the province of asia heard the word of the lord.
mortar for pounding rice
then they can train the younger women to love their husbands and children,
the vine is used for ???
a second angel followed and said, “fallen! fallen is babylon the great, which made all the nations drink the maddening wine of her adulteries.”
desire, want
“why were you searching for me?” he asked. “didn’t you know i had to be in my father’s house?”
is this blessedness only for the circumcised, or also for the uncircumcised? we have been saying that abraham’s faith was credited to him as righteousness.
for the lord himself will come down from heaven, with a loud command, with the voice of the archangel and with the trumpet call of god, and the dead in christ will rise first.
"a voice of one calling in the desert, 'prepare the way for the lord, make straight paths for him.' "
but after i have risen, i will go ahead of you into galilee."
cook by boiling in water
harvest
if we confront [someone], we go to his house and there we will confront  him. the [word] supmat is the same as that you are confronting him because you speak to him.
if anyone has caused grief, he has not so much grieved me as he has grieved all of you to some extent—not to put it too severely.
have a war
become slim
on that day no one who is on the housetop, with possessions inside, should go down to get them. likewise, no one in the field should go back for anything.
village on the liboganon river
then each of them was given a white robe, and they were told to wait a little longer, until the full number of their fellow servants, their brothers and sisters, were killed just as they had been.
to him who loves us and has freed us from our sins by his blood, and has made us to be a kingdom and priests to serve his god and father--to him be glory and power for ever and ever! amen.
for it is not the one who commends himself who is approved, but the one whom the lord commends.
charge interest
half; to halve
they worship me in vain; their teachings are merely human rules.’”
again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant looking for fine pearls.
youthful appearance
i know what it is to be in need, and i know what it is to have plenty. i have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation, whether well fed or hungry, whether living in plenty or in want.
when he noticed how the guests picked the places of honor at the table, he told them this parable:
we are procrastinating our waking up because we are lazy to get up.
test the depth
reprimand
something to do with having a spirit
then after fourteen years, i went up again to jerusalem, this time with barnabas. i took titus along also.
put
what i mean is this: the law, introduced 430 years later, does not set aside the covenant previously established by god and thus do away with the promise.
at my first defense, no one came to my support, but everyone deserted me. may it not be held against them.
put your trust in the light while you have it, so that you may become sons of light." when he had finished speaking, jesus left and hid himself from them.
so after they had fasted and prayed, they placed their hands on them and sent them off.
when jesus landed and saw a large crowd, he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. so he began teaching them many things.
paul, silas and timothy, to the church of the thessalonians in god our father and the lord jesus christ:
the woman was a greek, born in syrian phoenicia. she begged jesus to drive the demon out of her daughter.
then i saw a lamb, looking as if it had been slain, standing in the center of the throne, encircled by the four living creatures and the elders. he had seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of god sent out into all the earth.
boil over
to roam, wander around (as a tomcat)
small black fish (minnow)
those beetles are the same size, one and a half inches in length.
a person calls his chicken, whom he will feed corn, by saying, "kuru-kurù."
great relationship
we’re stepsister.
put
they arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail.
jesus called them together and said, "you know that those who are regarded as rulers of the gentiles lord it over them, and their high officials exercise authority over them.
a deacon must be faithful to his wife and must manage his children and his household well.
house of worship
do not neglect your gift, which was given you through prophecy when the body of elders laid their hands on you.
tell archippus: "see to it that you complete the work you have received in the lord."
toptop “even” [means] that which measures exactly the same; neither is longer [than the other].
nose mucus.
i plead with you, brothers and sisters, become like me, for i became like you. you did me no wrong.
people make holes on purpose, as outhouses or for garbage.
i’m going to box you.
but it is your custom for me to release to you one prisoner at the time of the passover. do you want me to release 'the king of the jews'?"
my bottom has become flattened
soul
abandon
when something gleams like gold, its glint is beautiful.
later, joseph of arimathea asked pilate for the body of jesus. now joseph was a disciple of jesus, but secretly because he feared the jews. with pilate's permission, he came and took the body away.
a small loosely woven basket of rattan, used for fishing
and asked, “what are you willing to give me if i deliver him over to you?” so they counted out for him thirty pieces of silver.
he has lost connection with the head, from whom the whole body, supported and held together by its ligaments and sinews, grows as god causes it to grow.
cough
defecate
and if the spirit of him who raised jesus from the dead is living in you, he who raised christ from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies because of his spirit who lives in you.
and all the people came early in the morning to hear him at the temple.
that is, that you and i may be mutually encouraged by each other’s faith.
hese are the two olive trees and the two lampstands that stand before the lord of the earth.
leaf
we believe and know that you are the holy one of god."
and they stayed continually at the temple, praising god.
bracelet
john, to the seven churches in the province of asia: grace and peace to you from him who is, and who was, and who is to come, and from the seven spirits before his throne, and from jesus christ, who is the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth.
that the rest of mankind may seek the lord, even all the gentiles who bear my name, says the lord, who does these things’—
by faith moses' parents hid him for three months after he was born, because they saw he was no ordinary child, and they were not afraid of the king's edict.
mosquito larvae.
paul, a servant of god and an apostle of jesus christ to further the faith of god’s elect and their knowledge of the truth that leads to godliness—
nor to devote themselves to myths and endless genealogies. these promote controversies rather than god's work-- which is by faith.
grace and peace to you from god our father and the lord jesus christ.
while they were worshiping the lord and fasting, the holy spirit said, “set apart for me barnabas and saul for the work to which i have called them.”
the abu-on bird, it's like the color (lit. design) of ashes. it's not so white; it's [color] is mixed.
adequate
to be emotionally strong
to make murky or opaque (as of water)
indeed herod and pontius pilate met together with the gentiles and the people of israel in this city to conspire against your holy servant jesus, whom you anointed.
from miletus, paul sent to ephesus for the elders of the church.
brain.
that evening after sunset the people brought to jesus all the sick and demonpossessed.
if there is someone who has done wrong, if there is someone who requests mercy or forgiveness, it's not appropriate if his wrong-doing is ignored. if you forgive him, [the fault] isn't being ignored.
spine of a leaf
be hungry
"tell us, when will these things happen? and what will be the sign that they are all about to be fulfilled?"
if our companion is carrying something heavy, we will come alongside to help.
kind of bird; killdeer, red-legged partridge, least sandpiper
i have been constantly on the move. i have been in danger from rivers, in danger from bandits, in danger from my own countrymen, in danger from gentiles; in danger in the city, in danger in the country, in danger at sea; and in danger from false brothers.
remember your leaders, who spoke the word of god to you. consider the outcome of their way of life and imitate their faith.
paul wanted to take him along on the journey, so he circumcised him because of the jews who lived in that area, for they all knew that his father was a greek.
clamp together
and pray that we may be delivered from wicked and evil people, for not everyone has faith.
lay one’s head on something
rice seedlings springing up far apart
if someone is stabbed by a raider, the spear will pierce and go through [the body].
this man was handed over to you by god’s deliberate plan and foreknowledge; and you, with the help of wicked men, put him to death by nailing him to the cross.
after further threats they let them go. they could not decide how to punish them, because all the people were praising god for what had happened.
jesus disappeared when he entered because his stones shone as they were filled with light.
a crowd was sitting around him, and they told him, "your mother and brothers are outside looking for you."
attentive
feel upset, hurt, sad, or angry
the crowds answered, “this is jesus, the prophet from nazareth in galilee.”
now to him who is able to do immeasurably more than all we ask or imagine, according to his power that is at work within us,
soup
for the law was given through moses; grace and truth came through jesus christ.
we watch [someone] closely because we don't know what his purpose is.
do not be yoked together with unbelievers. for what do righteousness and wickedness have in common? or what fellowship can light have with darkness?
thick, as fabric or book pages
for it is written that abraham had two sons, one by the slave woman and the other by the free woman.
we’ll leave early in the morning.
feast given for work; headache; chills from malaria
a person who is cleaning under the house pushes aside the debris.
then jesus' disciples said, "now you are speaking clearly and without figures of speech.
bolo sheath
the adolescent frog is becoming almost the same size as the mother in size.
we want each of you to show this same diligence to the very end, in order to make your hope sure.
good or bad omen.
for the perishable must clothe itself with the imperishable, and the mortal with immortality.
the reason for something
i'll be the one to roll the hoop of coiled rattan.
strain or filter out
the offspring of the beetles are the alibutod, katod, and langgi-on grubs.
abaca bark.
when we look in a mirror, we see our reflection.
there is danger not only that our trade will lose its good name, but also that the temple of the great goddess artemis will be discredited, and the goddess herself, who is worshiped throughout the province of asia and the world, will be robbed of her divine majesty."
jesus called his twelve disciples to him and gave them authority to drive out impure spirits and to heal every disease and sickness.
while they were wondering about this, suddenly two men in clothes that gleamed like lightning stood beside them.
for he who said, "do not commit adultery," also said, "do not murder." if you do not commit adultery but do commit murder, you have become a lawbreaker.
talkative (friendly and outgoing)
there was someone who smoothed off his lumber with a knife with which he was making a house.
song style used to tell a story
he traveled through that area, speaking many words of encouragement to the people, and finally arrived in greece,
breath
a kind of large fish.
what relation to lugtom is sanglit?
for i was hungry and you gave me nothing to eat, i was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink,
fast, abstain from eating rice.
in those days when the number of disciples was increasing, the hellenistic jews among them complained against the hebraic jews because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution of food.
as a result, many of them believed, as did also a number of prominent greek women and many greek men.
when we motivate a child to sweep, we hand him a broom so that he will learn.
you inform our companions.
beg insistently
sun
sleep.
when there was a person who was in difficulty who was going to another house, he asked for help.
at once the spirit sent him out into the desert,
to crack
if the wild pig is here in the middle, the people will surround it as they come out of hiding to attack it.
and they begged jesus repeatedly not to order them to go into the abyss.
eat a lot
cry at being left behind
after this he went down to capernaum with his mother and brothers and his disciples. there they stayed for a few days.
correct
hard worker
anyone who believes in the son of god has this testimony in his heart. anyone who does not believe god has made him out to be a liar, because he has not believed the testimony god has given about his son.
i have a heavy shirt. if someone asks for it i won't give it because i refrain from giving it because it was very expensive for me to buy.
simon peter and another disciple were following jesus. because this disciple was known to the high priest, he went with jesus into the high priest’s courtyard,
new growth of bamboo before leafing out.
the world cannot hate you, but it hates me because i testify that its works are evil.
tie-string of a bolo
a top which is spun with a string.
by these waters also the world of that time was deluged and destroyed.
it is god’s will that you should be sanctified: that you should avoid sexual immorality;
he will cut him to pieces and assign him a place with the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
i have come in my father’s name, and you do not accept me; but if someone else comes in his own name, you will accept him.
that woman has rolls of fat around her stomach.
[the umbrella] will not be attended to, it will be disregarded, it will be left in a fixed state.
"but he will reply, 'i don't know you or where you come from. away from me, all you evildoers!'
all of them were filled with the holy spirit and began to speak in other tongues as the spirit enabled them.
that day when evening came, he said to his disciples, "let us go over to the other side."
white
impette’s gnawing on a bone.
baby head louse, baby bedbug
skull.
i saw in heaven another great and marvelous sign: seven angels with the seven last plagues--last, because with them god's wrath is completed.
solid, durable
now there were seven brothers among us. the first one married and died, and since he had no children, he left his wife to his brother.
now a slave has no permanent place in the family, but a son belongs to it forever.
to make someone blind
to pray or sacrifice
when the men came to jesus, they said, “john the baptist sent us to you to ask, ‘are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?’”
the big lizard replaced the eggs of the small lizard with her own.
the meaning was jumbled when there were words which don't fit.
evil spirit
eat supper
shave off hair or feathers using a knife, razor, or sharp object
roast in fire
loan
necklace
if there is someone who collects payment for a horse but it has been sold on credit, the one who has received the horse can use anything for payment.
an elder must be blameless, faithful to his wife, a man whose children believe and are not open to the charge of being wild and disobedient.
cock’s comb.
but this is how god fulfilled what he had foretold through all the prophets, saying that his messiah would suffer.
following
i’ll use [the pieces of your hair to lengthen out my own.
fine linen, bright and clean, was given her to wear.” (fine linen stands for the righteous acts of god’s holy people.)
clap of thunder
as he was going into a village, ten men who had leprosy met him. they stood at a distance
he predestined us for adoption to sonship through jesus christ, in accordance with his pleasure and will—
"the first one came and said, 'sir, your mina has earned ten more.'
“i have no husband,” she replied. jesus said to her, “you are right when you say you have no husband.
dove’s call, believed to predict future events
straighten bangs [by cutting}.
it doesn’t matter how many there are
to pump
as jesus walked beside the sea of galilee, he saw simon and his brother andrew casting a net into the lake, for they were fishermen.
when paul was called in, tertullus presented his case before felix: “we have enjoyed a long period of peace under you, and your foresight has brought about reforms in this nation.  everywhere and in every way, most excellent felix, we acknowledge this with profound gratitude.
one day as he was teaching the people in the temple courts and preaching the gospel, the chief priests and the teachers of the law, together with the elders, came up to him.
but you say that if anyone declares that what might have been used to help their father or mother is ‘devoted to god,’
and jesus healed many who had various diseases. he also drove out many demons, but he would not let the demons speak because they knew who he was.
as for the sweet potatoes, they are bulging and cracking the soil.
sit with legs extended
lita told mery to sleep at their place. mery stayed a short time with them because she joined [them] for only one night.
navel
let some of your leaders come with me, and if the man has done anything wrong, they can press charges against him there.”
early in the morning, as jesus was on his way back to the city, he was hungry.
in damascus the governor under king aretas had the city of the damascenes guarded in order to arrest me.
when jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, "son, your sins are forgiven."
tarp
lansones
fell
bamboo mouth flute
cap for a roof
and many false prophets will appear and deceive many people.
i’ll let lubia scrape this from the pot.
tend
the very fact that you have lawsuits among you means you have been completely defeated already. why not rather be wronged? why not rather be cheated?
small, carved wooden spoon.
catch, or collect anything into a recepticle.
and sitting down, they kept watch over him there.
live such good lives among the pagans that, though they accuse you of doing wrong, they may see your good deeds and glorify god on the day he visits us.
for whoever is not against us is for us.
because of the tender mercy of our god, by which the rising sun will come to us from heaven  to shine on those living in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the path of peace.”
house
gather together
repeat the speech or words of someone.
sticky tree fruit
an edible, large leafed plant with tuberous roots; taro, a plant similar to gabi.
good, beautiful, clean, peaceful
to pass the long way around, detour
as for people, they have eyes when they are born.
small dark lizard
go downriver, especially on a raft
for i know your eagerness to help, and i have been boasting about it to the macedonians, telling them that since last year you in achaia were ready to give; and your enthusiasm has stirred most of them to action.
even to this day when moses is read, a veil covers their hearts.
sore on bottom of foot
there is nothing concealed that will not be disclosed, or hidden that will not be made known.
our house was sheltered by the library.
float on the surface, as of a dead fish
then some boats from tiberias landed near the place where the people had eaten the bread after the lord had given thanks.
hearing this, jesus said to jairus, “don’t be afraid; just believe, and she will be healed.”
rungs of a ladder
woven abaca trousers or blanket
then i will tell them plainly, ‘i never knew you. away from me, you evildoers!’
the son of cainan, the son of arphaxad, the son of shem, the son of noah, the son of lamech,
snake
having a form of godliness but denying its power. have nothing to do with such people.
inadvertently offend someone
soft soil.
for christ did not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel--not with words of human wisdom, lest the cross of christ be emptied of its power.
neither circumcision nor uncircumcision means anything; what counts is a new creation.
he answered, "have you never read what david did when he and his companions were hungry and in need?
please
i planned to visit you on my way to macedonia and to come back to you from macedonia, and then to have you send me on my way to judea.
cast all your anxiety on him because he cares for you.
become, change into something else.
to assume
speak clearly and directly
my father said, "start your motor because i will go first, and you will follow my motorboat wherever i go."
for as woman came from man, so also man is born of woman. but everything comes from god.
you have lived on earth in luxury and self-indulgence. you have fattened yourselves in the day of slaughter.
germs that spread disease
leave a tree standing when cutting down others
the child is making a depression in the dust and ashes of the fireplace.
mildewed
so they proposed two men: joseph called barsabbas (also known as justus) and matthias.
jesus straightened up and asked her, “woman, where are they? has no one condemned you?”
but godliness with contentment is great gain.
“look,” he said, “i see heaven open and the son of man standing at the right hand of god.”
whoever acknowledges me before others, i will also acknowledge before my father in heaven.
in the following directives i have no praise for you, for your meetings do more harm than good.
do not be deceived: god cannot be mocked. a man reaps what he sows.
soup, broth
to wrap up and bind together
to cut grass, clear ground of weeds.
if we live, we live for the lord; and if we die, we die for the lord. so, whether we live or die, we belong to the lord.
hold onto this camote.
be slow to carry out an activity or fulfill a request
because of this oath, jesus has become the guarantee of a better covenant.
just
to float partially submerged like flotsam such as dead and dying fish
then jesus said to his disciples: "therefore i tell you, do not worry about your life, what you will eat; or about your body, what you will wear.
inadvertently happen
a needle is used to remove thorns.
a group of epicurean and stoic philosophers began to debate with him. some of them asked, “what is this babbler trying to say?” others remarked, “he seems to be advocating foreign gods.” they said this because paul was preaching the good news about jesus and the resurrection.
and every woman who prays or prophesies with her head uncovered dishonors her head--it is just as though her head were shaved.
test everything. hold on to the good.
white cottony clouds
pulverize
when a person becomes emaciated, the side of his hip bone protrudes
so the servants went out into the streets and gathered all the people they could find, the bad as well as the good, and the wedding hall was filled with guests.
we’ll get slashed
multiple cloud heads forming
wage war
then a man named jairus, a synagogue leader, came and fell at jesus’ feet, pleading with him to come to his house
while gallio was proconsul of achaia, the jews of corinth made a united attack on paul and brought him to the place of judgment.
lose one's balance
the path of the highway which goes to sinuda, it is always twisting and turning.
if someone asks, “what day is tomorrow?” the reason he is asking is because he does not know whether the next day might be monday or wednesday.
submerged just under the surface of the water
not sticky, well-cooked rice
supper
while people are saying, “peace and safety,” destruction will come on them suddenly, as labor pains on a pregnant woman, and they will not escape.
to laugh; something that is laughed at.
and when the seven thunders spoke, i was about to write; but i heard a voice from heaven say, “seal up what the seven thunders have said and do not write it down.”
ve found you out.“what is your secret about me?”
be shepherds of god’s flock that is under your care, watching over them—not because you must, but because you are willing, as god wants you to be; not pursuing dishonest gain, but eager to serve;
therefore, since we are surrounded by such a great cloud of witnesses, let us throw off everything that hinders and the sin that so easily entangles, and let us run with perseverance the race marked out for us.
brothers, i do not consider myself yet to have taken hold of it. but one thing i do: forgetting what is behind and straining toward what is ahead,
for some time he refused. but finally he said to himself, ‘even though i don’t fear god or care what people think,
and god permitting, we will do so.
the hens of the chicken, they likewise cluck as they express agreement with the rooster who is crowing.
and saying, "it is true! the lord has risen and has appeared to simon."
because of this, the rumor spread among the brothers that this disciple would not die. but jesus did not say that he would not die; he only said, "if i want him to remain alive until i return, what is that to you?"
this is big
fit
one who was there had been an invalid for thirty-eight years.
stubborn, disobedient person.
if someone climbs that bamboo which was stuck in the ground which had money put on the top, he would slide down because it was slippery.
redeem
it was very upsetting because she supposed that there wouldn't be anyone who could help her to make a rice granary. i was the one who was able to come to [her] rescue.
when some of those standing near heard this, they said, "listen, he's calling elijah.
when the uproar had ended, paul sent for the disciples and, after encouraging them, said goodbye and set out for macedonia.
watch over
then the voice that i had heard from heaven spoke to me once more: “go, take the scroll that lies open in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the land.”
shout in triumph
low platform around inside of house where people sit or sleep
swift bubbly current as at a rapids
king agrippa, do you believe the prophets? i know you do."
and mary said: “my soul glorifies the lord
apply blood to something during a sacrifice
all who were sitting in the sanhedrin looked intently at stephen, and they saw that his face was like the face of an angel.
if the vine wound around the tree, it wrapped around it.
meet
“here is my servant whom i have chosen, the one i love, in whom i delight; i will put my spirit on him, and he will proclaim justice to the nations.
if one doesn’t know how to use a bolo, he ineffectively cuts the wood.
speckled tick
jesus went through all the towns and villages, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom and healing every disease and sickness.
and the tombs broke open. the bodies of many holy people who had died were raised to life.
we’re hungry for fresh rice but it’s a long time yet before harvest.
to mutter to oneself, similar to mugunmugun but different from a whisper
awaken
don’t you remember that when i was with you i used to tell you these things?
because you know that the testing of your faith develops perseverance.
not fitting
we also call the inside of this building roomy.
they totally destroy themselves. the only thing they give attention to is their own bad conduct.
they must first be tested; and then if there is nothing against them, let them serve as deacons.
when silas and timothy came from macedonia, paul devoted himself exclusively to preaching, testifying to the jews that jesus was the messiah.
acquainted
hurry to meet
you are the ones who are mugtas who leave your companions behind
male, man, boy
something long and cylindrical to cast
water dipper, drinking vessel, made from coconut shell
they all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
to shrivel up
to plant tobacco
to fish with a spear, as to wait and watch for them to come so one can spear them.
i was over-occupied because i had guests and i had guests who had arrived at my place.  as for my work, i had not completed it yet because there wasnt time. i was taken away [from my work] by my guests.
as i watched, i heard an eagle that was flying in midair call out in a loud voice: "woe! woe! woe to the inhabitants of the earth, because of the trumpet blasts about to be sounded by the other three angels!"
on the first day of every week, each one of you should set aside a sum of money in keeping with your income, saving it up, so that when i come no collections will have to be made.
for it is written: "i will destroy the wisdom of the wise; the intelligence of the intelligent i will frustrate."
god can testify how i long for all of you with the affection of christ jesus.
jesus said to him, "let the dead bury their own dead, but you go and proclaim the kingdom of god."
as it is, you boast and brag. all such boasting is evil.
as for a nursing mother, she abstains from eating foods served at someone else's house in case it might cause the child to die.
a person gets a piece of bamboo the size of that used for poling and that is what he splits in half.
jesus sent him away at once with a strong warning: "see that you don't tell this to anyone. but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the sacrifices that moses commanded for your cleansing, as a testimony to them."
we’ll be murdered if we aren’t set straight by the dove.
ashes
and here is my judgment about what is best for you in this matter. last year you were the first not only to give but also to have the desire to do so.
be strong to pull [on the saw] so that you will learn so that you will know how to saw.
after that, he poured water into a basin and began to wash his disciples’ feet, drying them with the towel that was wrapped around him.
then another horse came out, a fiery red one. its rider was given power to take peace from the earth and to make people kill each other. to him was given a large sword.
when the boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
when we strike a flint stone, sparks fly out.
suddenly, when they looked around, they no longer saw anyone with them except jesus.
one (used in counting)
an edible, large leafed plant with tuberous roots; taro, a plant similar to gabi.
to whisper to each other.
oh, this wall which i had painted has been scratched!
when this had dawned on him, he went to the house of mary the mother of john, also called mark, where many people had gathered and were praying.
kind of mottled rice
this became known all over joppa, and many people believed in the lord.
if someone is ill, he accuses someone of using poison. he thinks he something was added t]o his water or food].
this is the one i meant when i said, ‘a man who comes after me has surpassed me because he was before me.’
this became known all over joppa, and many people believed in the lord.
the next day they let the cavalry go on with him, while they returned to the barracks.
to search for a pig
if this is so, then the lord knows how to rescue godly men from trials and to hold the unrighteous for the day of judgment, while continuing their punishment.
across, other side, esp. of water
i’ll hire on with you to go downriver by raft because i don’t have any money now.
if anyone will not welcome you or listen to your words, leave that home or town and shake the dust off your feet.
basket with four to six corners or points
and they praised god because of me.
if i fought wild beasts in ephesus for merely human reasons, what have i gained? if the dead are not raised, "let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die."
he testifies to what he has seen and heard, but no one accepts his testimony.
kind of bird with a twitter; a quick noisy red bird.
just now
convenient
so that with one mind and one voice you may glorify the god and father of our lord jesus christ.
inlet
the men replied, “we have come from cornelius the centurion. he is a righteous and god-fearing man, who is respected by all the jewish people. a holy angel told him to ask you to come to his house so that he could hear what you have to say.”
i tell you the truth, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.
“in the law moses commanded us to stone such women. now what do you say?”
wing
the kings of the earth rise up and the rulers band together against the lord and against his anointed one.’
whose
and jesus grew in wisdom and stature, and in favor with god and man.
while everyone was marveling at all that jesus did, he said to his disciples, "listen carefully to what i am about to tell you: the son of man is going to be betrayed into the hands of men."
toothless
the python was curled up as it was lying in wait on the path of a pig.
for a noose to tighten on the neck of a bird or other animal
the rain came down, the streams rose, and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it fell with a great crash.
when usì’s wife sows rice seed, she casts in all directions.
pronged fish spear.
a kind of bird
the waterpole is cracked
as peter traveled about the country, he went to visit the lord’s people who lived in lydda.
again, if the trumpet does not sound a clear call, who will get ready for battle?
so, my brothers and sisters, you also died to the law through the body of christ, that you might belong to another, to him who was raised from the dead, in order that we might bear fruit for god.
when there is no more chaff, we cook it.
just as jannes and jambres opposed moses, so also these teachers oppose the truth. they are men of depraved minds, who, as far as the faith is concerned, are rejected.
there are six stitches in my gums. each one was knotted.
see to it, then, that the light within you is not darkness.
kind of small bird.
those who were sent ahead went and found it just as he had told them.
to utilize or apply the special secret knowledge to produce a cure
the [word] tanob, it just has to do with a person who swims underwater. he is slow to come up for air.
when the trigger of the pig trap is released, a pig which has been caught.
kind of blackened spear
but how then would the scriptures be fulfilled that say it must happen in this way?”
"i told them that it is not the roman custom to hand over any man before he has faced his accusers and has had an opportunity to defend himself against their charges.
they traveled through the whole island until they came to paphos. there they met a jewish sorcerer and false prophet named bar-jesus,
bobbed hair
when the day of pentecost came, they were all together in one place.
wooden hoe-like instrument
one says, “usi, let's wrestle.” the other says, “yes, let’s wrestle,” and so then they wrestle with each other.
they devour widows' houses and for a show make lengthy prayers. such men will be punished most severely."
i write to you, fathers, because you have known him who is from the beginning. i write to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one. i write to you, dear children, because you have known the father.
woe to you, teachers of the law and pharisees, you hypocrites! you shut the door of the kingdom of heaven in people’s faces. you yourselves do not enter, nor will you let those enter who are trying to.
the number of those who ate was about five thousand men, besides women and children.
large crowds followed him, and he healed them there.
then he asked the second, ‘and how much do you owe?’ ‘a thousand bushels of wheat,’ he replied. he told him, ‘take your bill and make it eight hundred.’
i want men everywhere to lift up holy hands in prayer, without anger or disputing.
grace and peace to you from god our father and the lord jesus christ.
for there is one god and one mediator between god and mankind, the man christ jesus,
we did not follow cleverly invented stories when we told you about the power and coming of our lord jesus christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
converse
then the high priest stood up and said to jesus, “are you not going to answer? what is this testimony that these men are bringing against you?”
jab
the burrows of the marmots mound are connected underneath to the places where they make their nests.
not to weed in center of a field
if a child is extremely hot, he will jerk.
think about
when they had carried out all that was written about him, they took him down from the cross and laid him in a tomb.
if anyone has ears to hear, let him hear."
but i am sending the brothers in order that our boasting about you in this matter should not prove hollow, but that you may be ready, as i said you would be.
this service that you perform is not only supplying the needs of god's people but is also overflowing in many expressions of thanks to god.
tie string of a bolo.
kindle a fire
bamboo flute.
the flood of the liboganon will come up to us.
so she came running to simon peter and the other disciple, the one jesus loved, and said, “they have taken the lord out of the tomb, and we don’t know where they have put him!”
who comforts us in all our troubles, so that we can comfort those in any trouble with the comfort we ourselves receive from god.
the people who were at the pool when their companion was drowning, they were stymied as to what to do in order to rescue [the drowning person]. that is why they were immobilized.
“lord,” ananias answered, “i have heard many reports about this man and all the harm he has done to your holy people in jerusalem.
by you
and the lord said, “listen to what the unjust judge says.
move to another location
poison an enemy
again jesus said, “simon son of john, do you love me?” he answered, “yes, lord, you know that i love you.” jesus said, “take care of my sheep.”
a person who is afflicted with a fear of people is terrified and must travel to wherever he might go.
when i went  to visit [someone's house], i inadvertently arrived at the same time they were eating. i said, “so you are eating.”
likewise you also have those who hold to the teaching of the nicolaitans.
since they were spending many days there, festus discussed paul's case with the king. he said: "there is a man here whom felix left as a prisoner.
judas son of james, and judas iscariot, who became a traitor.
after we had torn ourselves away from them, we put out to sea and sailed straight to kos. the next day we went to rhodes and from there to patara.
so that, having been justified by his grace, we might become heirs having the hope of eternal life.
“this is to my father’s glory, that you bear much fruit, showing yourselves to be my disciples.”
when jesus had again crossed over by boat to the other side of the lake, a large crowd gathered around him while he was by the lake.
expression: "look here; see this"
a sieve
the day after.
but they went out and spread the news about him all over that region.
chaff of tiny broken rice chips (usually given to chickens)
now there were seven brothers. the first one married and died without leaving any children.
adhere, stick together
a kind of small fish
a kind of short cooking banana.
and so the jewish leaders said to the man who had been healed, “it is the sabbath; the law forbids you to carry your mat.”
pull camotes up by the roots
indeed there are those who are last who will be first, and first who will be last."
swelling of jaw or jaws below the ear, especially of mumps.
so joseph also went up from the town of nazareth in galilee to judea, to bethlehem the town of david, because he belonged to the house and line of david.
then the angel i had seen standing on the sea and on the land raised his right hand to heaven.
to be eaten by evil spirit
how god anointed jesus of nazareth with the holy spirit and power, and how he went around doing good and healing all who were under the power of the devil, because god was with him.
it is difficult for a person to cross the swift bubbly current of a river.
if a sack of rice is divided by three, there will be three equal portions.
but i tell you that everyone will have to give account on the day of judgment for every empty word they have spoken.
when he said this, a dispute broke out between the pharisees and the sadducees, and the assembly was divided.
stringy
to commit oneself to revenge, or to get back at someone.
to throw or cast a spear
whatever you have learned or received or heard from me, or seen in me—put it into practice. and the god of peace will be with you.
but herod said, “i beheaded john. who, then, is this i hear such things about?” and he tried to see him.
when we plant yearly fields, we go to see how the corn fields are.
all
one lord, one faith, one baptism;
a kind of tree
knife with sharp blade on one side with blunt, but sharp end
long seed bead
second item
but you know that timothy has proved himself, because as a son with his father he has served with me in the work of the gospel.
when they heard that jesus was alive and that she had seen him, they did not believe it.
and all people will see god’s salvation.’”
when paul came in, the jews who had come down from jerusalem stood around him. they brought many serious charges against him, but they could not prove them.
the world
gums (of a person)
watch over
to envelop, wrap around (diaper, bandage)
immediately, because herod did not give praise to god, an angel of the lord struck him down, and he was eaten by worms and died.
deep pool in a creek
plant with a stick
i've become tired of your conduct of habitual ?? drinking
after the two days he left for galilee.
they sold property and possessions to give to anyone who had need.
clarify it.
as jesus went on from there, he saw a man named matthew sitting at the tax collector’s booth. “follow me,” he told him, and matthew got up and followed him.
the grandmother was the one to take care of and provide sustenance for her daughter's child who was orphaned.
they marched across the breadth of the earth and surrounded the camp of god's people, the city he loves. but fire came down from heaven and devoured them.
the piglets take turns moving around
splinter
to be suspicious
cover
not that i have already obtained all this, or have already been made perfect, but i press on to take hold of that for which christ jesus took hold of me.
we would like to request please that you take this for us-excl please.
paul looked straight at the sanhedrin and said, “my brothers, i have fulfilled my duty to god in all good conscience to this day.”
when jesus saw her, he called her forward and said to her, "woman, you are set free from your infirmity."
when the corn is still unripe, we harvest enough individual plants to cook.
the other places which have been reached by the sun have nothing to eat because their ground is dry.
a person belonging to a particular group
throw
time, room, or space for something; opportunity
the woodsy area between a village and the river.
we assumed this was [a good place] to pass however there were sharpened pieces of bamboo.
time
successful
if i have a guests, i will apologize that i have to leave  them here at the house.
jesus replied, "foxes have holes and birds of the air have nests, but the son of man has no place to lay his head."
"no one sews a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment. if he does, the new piece will pull away from the old, making the tear worse.
he’s covering [his] head with a banana leaf.
when we put bits into the mouths of horses to make them obey us, we can turn the whole animal.
for just as we share abundantly in the sufferings of christ, so also our comfort abounds through christ.
i have a cold.
if [someone] marries the [widowed] mother, that man is the stepfather of her children.
to yell.
the fifth angel sounded his trumpet, and i saw a star that had fallen from the sky to the earth. the star was given the key to the shaft of the abyss.
reciprocate an exchange of a brideprice
now there have been many of those priests, since death prevented them from continuing in office;
for you are receiving the end result of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
i sent you to reap what you have not worked for. others have done the hard work, and you have reaped the benefits of their labor.”
“do you hear what these children are saying?” they asked him. “yes,” replied jesus, “have you never read, ‘from the lips of children and infants you, lord, have called forth your praise’?”
carabao
but i will show you whom you should fear: fear him who, after the killing of the body, has power to throw you into hell. yes, i tell you, fear him.
follow the way of love and eagerly desire gifts of the spirit, especially prophecy.
if you are not disciplined (and everyone undergoes discipline), then you are illegitimate children and not true sons.
there are many grubs which are squirming.
live
to disturb or butt up against something
and in that place many believed in jesus.
fly (insect)
we are unable to coerce a child if he won’t obey.
when the child crawls, it also moves forward.
tree with winged seeds
prohibit
but the chief priests and pharisees had given orders that if anyone found out where jesus was, he should report it so that they might arrest him.
lift up both of your hands so that you can be rescued from drowning.
this was the second sign jesus performed after coming from judea to galilee.
to be silent.
ponder
a long curved bolo, esp. one with a wavy blade.
now there were some greeks among those who went up to worship at the festival.
the other jews joined him in his hypocrisy, so that by their hypocrisy even barnabas was led astray.
saw some of his disciples eating food with hands that were "unclean," that is, unwashed.
sloping land
if a woman smells something burning, her affection for that man will disappear.
my uncle had [me] point out where to cut.
god of the hunt; lives in the clouds; betelnut and chickens are offered to him the night before a hunt.
but paul chose silas and left, commended by the believers to the grace of the lord.
i tell you, you will not get out until you have paid the last penny. "
if we cross to the opposite side of the river, we will be carried away by the current if the water is swift.
misfortune, as losing all children
to race, involving just two people.
succumb
to pass out
and they cried out in a loud voice: "salvation belongs to our god, who sits on the throne, and to the lamb."
generic term for any bird related to the hawk or eagle which preys on chickens, snakes or other small birds or animals.
“go,” he told him, “wash in the pool of siloam” (this word means “sent”). so the man went and washed, and came home seeing.
some of the jews were persuaded and joined paul and silas, as did a large number of god-fearing greeks and quite a few prominent women.
he chose to give us birth through the word of truth, that we might be a kind of firstfruits of all he created.
shelf, contradict
don’t you be upset, because i’m still here.
whose house?
an argument developed between some of john’s disciples and a certain jew over the matter of ceremonial washing.
for we brought nothing into the world, and we can take nothing out of it.
raise
before i burn it, i pile up the wood.
tips of sweet potato plants
god “will repay each person according to what they have done.”
the sun gives brilliance to the light.
sleep together (as husband and wife)
but the sand by the ocean sparkles.
when paul placed his hands on them, the holy spirit came on them, and they spoke in tongues and prophesied.
i'm going to move to some other place for a while.
erastus stayed in corinth, and i left trophimus sick in miletus.
i was too big for it.
suppose a man comes into your meeting wearing a gold ring and fine clothes, and a poor man in shabby clothes also comes in.
for it is written: “be glad, barren woman, you who never bore a child; shout for joy and cry aloud, you who were never in labor; because more are the children of the desolate woman than of her who has a husband.”
as for the sweet potatoes, they are bulging and cracking the soil.
to have a secret.
"now learn this lesson from the fig tree: as soon as its twigs get tender and its leaves come out, you know that summer is near
watch, care for.
when the [ruver] dries up, there is no more water because it has become dry.
awl
any kind of  shrimp or crayfish.
i have met him
don’t you know that those who serve in the temple get their food from the temple, and that those who serve at the altar share in what is offered on the altar?
to sop up meat juice with camotes
center post of a house
light up, as a lamp or flashlight
about three in the afternoon jesus cried out in a loud voice, “eli, eli, lema sabachthani?” (which means “my god, my god, why have you forsaken me?”).
and to know this love that surpasses knowledge—that you may be filled to the measure of all the fullness of god.
in damascus there was a disciple named ananias. the lord called to him in a vision, “ananias!” “yes, lord,” he answered.
so paul and barnabas spent considerable time there, speaking boldly for the lord, who confirmed the message of his grace by enabling them to perform signs and wonders.
he said to them, "do you still not understand?"
this is what i’ll pay you for healing us.
calf of leg
buling twitches in her sleep.
i don't know.
simon peter answered him, "lord, to whom shall we go? you have the words of eternal life.
now about our brother apollos: i strongly urged him to go to you with the brothers. he was quite unwilling to go now, but he will go when he has the opportunity.
if someone is very worried, he comes apart emotionally.
two people holding onto something
because of the signs he was given power to do on behalf of the first beast, he deceived the inhabitants of the earth. he ordered them to set up an image in honor of the beast who was wounded by the sword and yet lived.
one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues came and said to me, "come, i will show you the bride, the wife of the lamb."
wriggle as one's stomach when one is hungry.
if it could, would they not have stopped being offered? for the worshipers would have been cleansed once for all, and would no longer have felt guilty for their sins.
he then began to teach them that the son of man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, chief priests and teachers of the law, and that he must be killed and after three days rise again.
but god raised him from the dead, freeing him from the agony of death, because it was impossible for death to keep its hold on him.
for when we were in the realm of the flesh, the sinful passions aroused by the law were at work in us, so that we bore fruit for death.
so i find this law at work: although i want to do good, evil is right there with me.
go off in a different direction [
barbs
charcoal.
goat
they arrived again in jerusalem, and while jesus was walking in the temple courts, the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders came to him.
have you been thinking all along that we have been defending ourselves to you? we have been speaking in the sight of god as those in christ; and everything we do, dear friends, is for your strengthening.
offer
pluck with a pick or finger
"if, while we seek to be justified in christ, it becomes evident that we ourselves are sinners, does that mean that christ promotes sin? absolutely not!
"when you see 'the abomination that causes desolation' standing where it does not belong--let the reader understand--then let those who are in judea flee to the mountains.
“when moses was forty years old, he decided to visit his own people, the israelites.
no longer will a man teach his neighbor, or a man his brother, saying, 'know the lord,' because they will all know me, from the least of them to the greatest.
for whoever keeps the whole law and yet stumbles at just one point is guilty of breaking all of it.
one's gallbladder is good if there is nothing to upset [him/her].
he trusts in god. let god rescue him now if he wants him, for he said, ‘i am the son of god.’”
but the mother said, "that's enough from this child who won't get rid of the subject of his arguing."
and i trust that you will discover that we have not failed the test.
for everything in the world--the cravings of sinful man, the lust of his eyes and the boasting of what he has and does--comes not from the father but from the world.
the person with good character: he isn’t a liar, he doesn’t gossip/start scandals, he is afraid to do bad things, he humbles himself.
how dreadful it will be in those days for pregnant women and nursing mothers!
we are witnesses of these things, and so is the holy spirit, whom god has given to those who obey him.”
hurry to meet
“but woe to you who are rich, for you have already received your comfort.
we are alive.
but saul began to destroy the church. going from house to house, he dragged off both men and women and put them in prison.
four (counting)
misfortune, as losing all children
gooey, sticky, malleable
roam from house to house looking for food
it’ll stop bleeding.
the person who has a kuglung instrument gets a string made from the philidendra.
godly sorrow brings repentance that leads to salvation and leaves no regret, but worldly sorrow brings death.
a junction or crossing, as of a highway or two rivers.
side beam
“you’re out of your mind,” they told her. when she kept insisting that it was so, they said, “it must be his angel.”
any meat or fish that can be eaten; to go fishing; to catch edible water creatures.
axe
greet all the saints in christ jesus. the brothers who are with me send greetings.
the fifth sardonyx, the sixth carnelian, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, and the twelfth amethyst.
in beatings, imprisonments and riots; in hard work, sleepless nights and hunger;
to watch, view.
in order that in the coming ages he might show the incomparable riches of his grace, expressed in his kindness to us in christ jesus.
to be famous or powerful.
for it seems to me that god has put us apostles on display at the end of the procession, like those condemned to die in the arena. we have been made a spectacle to the whole universe, to angels as well as to human beings.
biting
move backwards
the bongit, okang, kulagu, and pulow owls only call at night. when they hoot, the older people mistakenly think they are evil spirits.
but understand this: if the owner of the house had known at what time of night the thief was coming, he would have kept watch and would not have let his house be broken into.
six days before the passover, jesus came to bethany, where lazarus lived, whom jesus had raised from the dead.
thunder
the rice will be abundant if it is grown in a swampy area.
a sweet, dessert-like cooked staple such as rice, corn or millet mixed with sugarcane sap and wrapped in a leaf and buried. eaten after two days.
dam made of stones and leaves to impede flow of water used to catch fish and shrimp
the rest of mankind that were not killed by these plagues still did not repent of the work of their hands; they did not stop worshiping demons, and idols of gold, silver, bronze, stone and wood--idols that cannot see or hear or walk.
don't slouch; don't be bent over.
sit with legs extended
we will hunker down if we hide.
the pig trap, the noose trap [for a bird] and the noose trap [for a rat], all of them have a trigger which is that which releases the catch [on the trigger].
if others have this right of support from you, shouldn’t we have it all the more? but we did not use this right. on the contrary, we put up with anything rather than hinder the gospel of christ.
the jailer called for lights, rushed in and fell trembling before paul and silas.
now about brotherly love we do not need to write to you, for you yourselves have been taught by god to love each other.
if there is a person whom he has met, he will examine his face closely to see if that is really him.
a hoop.
"no one knows about that day or hour, not even the angels in heaven, nor the son, but only the father.
relationship of one person to many.
the material has been put in order.
judah the father of perez and zerah, whose mother was tamar, perez the father of hezron, hezron the father of ram,
back away; get out of the way; set aside
we aren’t allowed a minute’s peace by the raiders.
rub off, as kernels of corn; fall out, as baby teeth
they were very sad and began to say to him one after the other, “surely you don’t mean me, lord?”
if my child takes the opportunity to eat at someone else's house without my permission, i will scold him/her.
he saw at the water’s edge two boats, left there by the fishermen, who were washing their nets.
when he has married [his wife], he will erase the charm which he had applied |(to her] so that the thinking of his wife will become normal
“what is it you want?” he asked. she said, “grant that one of these two sons of mine may sit at your right and the other at your left in your kingdom.”
ill-mannered woman
if he were on earth, he would not be a priest, for there are already priests who offer the gifts prescribed by the law.
kind of banana, long and green
use it to swat blowflies.
eye leech
happened to
an older person; leader or elder
make-believe
bring something along
when the sweet potato field has become old, we remove the old sweet potato vines and then we allow the sweet potatoes to grow back as they sprout new sweet potato vines.
your boasting is not good. don’t you know that a little yeast leavens the whole batch of dough?
both of them were righteous in the sight of god, observing all the lord’s commands and decrees blamelessly.
again he denied it. after a little while, those standing near said to peter, "surely you are one of them, for you are a galilean."
put out of joint
swelling
the people placed their things in a bedbasket with a lid. it won't deteriorate if it is covered with the sticky sap of a tabun fruit.
but i think it is necessary to send back to you epaphroditus, my brother, fellow worker and fellow soldier, who is also your messenger, whom you sent to take care of my needs.
"then another servant came and said, 'sir, here is your mina; i have kept it laid away in a piece of cloth.
smile
he chews trash.
edible red larvae of a beetle found in rattan
take a step
pestle used for pounding rice.
disobey or go beyond someone’s advice
jesus answered, “everyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again,
as for a person who is stepping down to the ground from his house, if he hears the call of a dove at the same time, he/she will not go ahead with climbing down.
both the one who makes people holy and those who are made holy are of the same family. so jesus is not ashamed to call them brothers and sisters.
become stiff and sore from travel or exercise
i had to eat some food to temporarily satiate my hunger.
for the husband is the head of the wife as christ is the head of the church, his body, of which he is the savior.
to intentionally make an impression with some object.
when the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the pain.
little pollywog
then jesus said to his disciples, “truly i tell you, it is hard for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of heaven.
a jar of wine vinegar was there, so they soaked a sponge in it, put the sponge on a stalk of the hyssop plant, and lifted it to jesus' lips.
release
night, nighttime
to plant rice out of season
what a wretched man i am! who will rescue me from this body that is subject to death?
the jews were amazed and asked, "how did this man get such learning without having studied?"
tiny lizard
starting from the beginning, peter told them the whole story:
keyed up as when feeling rushed to leave on a trip
shouting, "men of israel, help us! this is the man who teaches all men everywhere against our people and our law and this place. and besides, he has brought greeks into the temple area and defiled this holy place."
unripe (as bananas or corn)
there were three gates on the east, three on the north, three on the south and three on the west.
the lord is not slow in keeping his promise, as some understand slowness. instead he is patient with you, not wanting anyone to perish, but everyone to come to repentance.
igì is venting her frustration because there is no one to watch her children, so she cannot go dig camotes.
now about the dead rising--have you not read in the book of moses, in the account of the bush, how god said to him, 'i am the god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob' ?
search out a trail
since they did not know the righteousness of god and sought to establish their own, they did not submit to god’s righteousness.
so he became as much superior to the angels as the name he has inherited is superior to theirs.
here a dinner was given in jesus’ honor. martha served, while lazarus was among those reclining at the table with him.
but the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have pilate release barabbas instead.
“they will do such things because they have not known the father or me.”
and the child grew and became strong in spirit; and he lived in the wilderness until he appeared publicly to israel.
while jesus was in bethany in the home of simon the leper,
to be intercepted.
for he says to moses, “i will have mercy on whom i have mercy, and i will have compassion on whom i have compassion.”
take my son aside to tell him where others won't hear that i will have him come home for a while when they have finished playing.
when jesus had called the twelve together, he gave them power and authority to drive out all demons and to cure diseases,
"everything is permissible"--but not everything is beneficial. "everything is permissible"--but not everything is constructive.
getting along with each other; companionship or interpersonal relationships
quit talking because i will get fed up with you and i will happen to react in an undesirable manner against you.
he went to him and bandaged his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. then he put the man on his own donkey, brought him to an inn and took care of him.
the people of israel. theirs is the adoption to sonship; theirs the divine glory, the covenants, the receiving of the law, the temple worship and the promises.
because it is consecrated by the word of god and prayer.
but that if a woman has long hair, it is her glory? for long hair is given to her as a covering.
to run out of patience with someone
it is a fat head [of grain].
(now jesus himself had pointed out that a prophet has no honor in his own country.)
and david says: “may their table become a snare and a trap, a stumbling block and a retribution for them.
scattered, infrequent in space; far apart
cooked food softened by boiling, like mature corn or beans
tie the goat to something because it is eating the plants.
but i did not want to do anything without your consent, so that any favor you do will be spontaneous and not forced.
if the disease of measles comes to some place, [and] if someone comes for a visit from that place, the disease will be transmitted to us.
to write
carabao
the jews answered him, "aren't we right in saying that you are a samaritan and demon-possessed?"
yet the news about him spread all the more, so that crowds of people came to hear him and to be healed of their sicknesses.
as it is written: “i have made you a father of many nations.” he is our father in the sight of god, in whom he believed—the god who gives life to the dead and calls into being things that were not.
let us hold unswervingly to the hope we profess, for he who promised is faithful.
path.
to be bent, as a wire
by faith he made his home in the promised land like a stranger in a foreign country; he lived in tents, as did isaac and jacob, who were heirs with him of the same promise.
all of them are being diligent
to blow off (by wind)
forgive
if there would be someone who would ask who your companion is, they would say, “we are just a married couple. we don't have any children yet.”
“and for your sake i am glad i was not there, so that you may believe. but let us go to him.”
dear friends, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have confidence before god
in the same way the rebels who were crucified with him also heaped insults on him.
there was someone who cut off [a piece of wood] which he would make into a single mortar.
to lose permanent teeth
after he took him aside, away from the crowd, jesus put his fingers into the man's ears. then he spit and touched the man's tongue.
but suppose that servant is wicked and says to himself, ‘my master is staying away a long time,’
it was just soaked briefly.
many deceivers, who do not acknowledge jesus christ as coming in the flesh, have gone out into the world. any such person is the deceiver and the antichrist.
at that time they will see the son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
all this is from god, who reconciled us to himself through christ and gave us the ministry of reconciliation:
when his wife (has been released from the charm by means of a ritual, the woman's attitude toward that man will become bad because her love had been forced when she was married [to him].
reject something as being too small or insufficient
if anyone's name was not found written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.
the fire is smoky
but concerning israel he says, “all day long i have held out my hands to a disobedient and obstinate people.”
step on
i am sending him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are, and that he may encourage you.
cedar tree
smoke out bees
there is nothing concealed that will not be disclosed, or hidden that will not be made known.
give relief or aid
to him who is able to keep you from falling and to present you before his glorious presence without fault and with great joy-- to the only god our savior be glory, majesty, power and authority, through jesus christ our lord, before all ages, now and forevermore! amen.
when he came out, he could not speak to them. they realized he had seen a vision in the temple, for he kept making signs to them but remained unable to speak.
when usì’s wife sows rice seed, she casts in all directions.
wrap up
bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you.
the monkey will steal the key.
beginning
i plead with euodia and i plead with syntyche to be of the same mind in the lord.
to avail oneself of an opportunity to eat
the crowd spoke up, "we have heard from the law that the christ will remain forever, so how can you say, 'the son 1598 of man must be lifted up'? who is this 'son of man'?"
"i will be a father to you, and you will be my sons and daughters, says the lord almighty."
a dog who is hunting a pig smells the footprints of the pig and then follows the scent.
do carefully.
‘we played the pipe for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not mourn.’
but land that produces thorns and thistles is worthless and is in danger of being cursed. in the end it will be burned.
the pig which i am giving to you is being used to open the door to inquiry to jog your memory if you have forgotten that which is mine that is, an unpaid debt for help with a bride price?
the spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are god’s children.
fan, as a fire
to be industrious, not lazy.
for the perishable must clothe itself with the imperishable, and the mortal with immortality.
escort this young man to the leader of the soldiers because he has something to tell him.
meeting to decide on a course of action.
“blessed are you when people insult you, persecute you and falsely say all kinds of evil against you because of me.
taganay is the one who took care of lita's children who were left behind.
the niece who had been recently married was broken loose from her marriage relationship by her aunt because she had simply advised her to desert her husband.
the locusts looked like horses prepared for battle. on their heads they wore something like crowns of gold, and their faces resembled human faces.
the bone(s) of a human head is called the skull.
as jesus was saying these things, a woman in the crowd called out, "blessed is the mother who gave you birth and nursed you."
shed, as a skin or soft shell.
maambago is important because it is admired because the people are good.
infected teeth from not brushing
he replied, "blessed rather are those who hear the word of god and obey it."
those who belong to christ jesus have crucified the sinful nature with its passions and desires.
waning noon.
for everything god created is good, and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving,
that the christ would suffer and, as the first to rise from the dead, would proclaim light to his own people and to the gentiles."
expression: "look here; see this"
only hold on to what you have until i come.
there in maambago there were those who were caused to plant corn.
millet
deep sound, low note
speckled tick
from there we put out to sea again and passed to the lee of cyprus because the winds were against us.
for i do not want to see you now and make only a passing visit; i hope to spend some time with you, if the lord permits.
light
whenever you are arrested and brought to trial, do not worry beforehand about what to say. just say whatever is given you at the time, for it is not you speaking, but the holy spirit.
the next day, the one after preparation day, the chief priests and the pharisees went to pilate.
to try to scare someone
they are senseless, faithless, heartless, ruthless.
after jesus had gone indoors, his disciples asked him privately, "why couldn't we drive it out?
wise
indeed
inadvertently happen
in damascus the governor under king aretas had the city of the damascenes guarded in order to arrest me.
knotty (with many joints/knots)
let's not digress from our work.
as soon as judas had taken the bread, he went out. and it was night.
very truly i tell you, a time is coming and has now come when the dead will hear the voice of the son of god and those who hear will live.
the two people were racing [each other].
then came the feast of dedication at jerusalem. it was winter,
i didn’t know that one
for this reason, since the day we heard about you, we have not stopped praying for you and asking god to fill you with the knowledge of his will through all spiritual wisdom and understanding.
look at the birds of the air; they do not sow or reap or store away in barns, and yet your heavenly father feeds them. are you not much more valuable than they?
“then the lord said to him, ‘take off your sandals, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.
then jesus came from galilee to the jordan to be baptized by john.
the seventy-two returned with joy and said, “lord, even the demons submit to us in your name.”
it’s bad to marry when still a child.
he did not enter by means of the blood of goats and calves; but he entered the most holy place once for all by his own blood, having obtained eternal redemption.
wash them right away.
even so, when you see these things happening, you know that the kingdom of god is near.
because the holy spirit had not yet come on any of them; they had simply been baptized in the name of the lord jesus.
chicken fight
for this reason god sends them a powerful delusion so that they will believe the lie
i write to you, fathers, because you have known him who is from the beginning. i write to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of god lives in you, and you have overcome the evil one.
dialect variation of "huus"
and he said to them, "i have eagerly desired to eat this passover with you before i suffer.
soul
as for a vertical jump, we [jump] upwards.
immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue set free, and he began to speak, praising god.
cousin
remember lot’s wife!
if their relationship is good, their relationship will develop.
i have much to write you, but i do not want to do so with pen and ink.
steal land from someone.
for we maintain that a person is justified by faith apart from the works of the law.
salt
then each of them was given a white robe, and they were told to wait a little longer, until the full number of their fellow servants, their brothers and sisters, were killed just as they had been.
“to the angel of the church in smyrna write: these are the words of him who is the first and the last, who died and came to life again.
a kind of bird
while they were reclining at the table eating, he said, "i tell you the truth, one of you will betray me--one who is eating with me."
the ground from one mountain, creates a valley over to the slope of the other mountain.
he chews trash.
to leave behind (involuntarily)
preference
the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising god for all the things they had heard and seen, which were just as they had been told.
a woven, patterned necklace with strands of beads
love must be sincere. hate what is evil; cling to what is good.
jesus asked, “were not all ten cleansed? where are the other nine?
now i want you to know, brothers, that what has happened to me has really served to advance the gospel.
kind of bird; horned lark.
i only know that in every city the holy spirit warns me that prison and hardships are facing me.
gold
then how is it that each of us hears them in our native language?
to decrease
herod added this to them all: he locked john up in prison.
abundant foods.
what do you prefer? shall i come to you with a whip, or in love and with a gentle spirit?
about midnight paul and silas were praying and singing hymns to god, and the other prisoners were listening to them.
don't be deceived, my dear brothers.
and again, "praise the lord, all you gentiles, and sing praises to him, all you peoples."
for i could wish that i myself were cursed and cut off from christ for the sake of my people, those of my own race,
to grate
offspring of a large animal
is/was here, or there (close by)
when we cross a river, if we cannot locate a shallow place because the water is foaming, we will be swept into deep water.
to succeed, accomplish
therefore, since these facts are undeniable, you ought to be quiet and not do anything rash.
and said, “you went into the house of uncircumcised men and ate with them.”
to take care of someone left behind
then i said, ‘here i am—it is written about me in the scroll—i have come to do your will, my god.’”
the corn is becoming completely lumpy
when i internalized or believed in jesus...
but when that servant went out, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred silver coins. he grabbed him and began to choke him. ‘pay back what you owe me!’ he demanded.
true, real
juice or sap of vegetables and fruits
feel with tongue or fingers.
when jesus looked up and saw a great crowd coming toward him, he said to philip, "where shall we buy bread for these people to eat?"
the beast, which you saw, once was, now is not, and will come up out of the abyss and go to his destruction. the inhabitants of the earth whose names have not been written in the book of life from the creation of the world will be astonished when they see the beast, because he once was, now is not, and yet will come.
then jesus replied, "have i not chosen you, the twelve? yet one of you is a devil!"
he went through syria and cilicia, strengthening the churches.
i will chose a wider house if no one is living [
dear friends, i am not writing you a new command but an old one, which you have had since the beginning. this old command is the message you have heard.
cut pieces out of that wood when it’s dry.
arrow(s), or spear(s), [or] a spear trap are that which are used for hunting.
banana
"what then will the owner of the vineyard do to them? he will come and kill those tenants and give the vineyard to others." when the people heard this, they said, "may this never be!"
but the one who prophesies speaks to people for their strengthening, encouraging and comfort.
when it was time for elizabeth to have her baby, she gave birth to a son.
lose all offspring (bad luck for a hen)
peaceful feeling
calm area of water, deep pool
he said, “go away. the girl is not dead but asleep.” but they laughed at him.
and he has come here with authority from the chief priests to arrest all who call on your name.”
goodness gracious that you travelled in the sunshine when it is exceedingly hot!
finish
when there is a shallow mini-lake of water which doesn't dry up, that is a swamp because it has never been cut.
swift, fast
but on arriving at the jail, the officers did not find them there. so they went back and reported,
children, don’t peek at the one giving birth because you will get cataracts if you look at the afterbirth, and you will be cursed. when you grow up, you won’t be able to see.
love charm
all domesticated animals have hips but chickens don't because their legs are attached to (lit. are here on) their sides.
undergo a trial to prove oneself innocent of an accusation
but i want you to know that the son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins.” so he said to the paralyzed man, “i tell you, get up, take your mat and go home.”
why did you falsely accuse me of doing something when i certainly did not do something wrong.
no one takes this honor upon himself; he must be called by god, just as aaron was.
i can do everything through him who gives me strength.
grieve, mourn and wail. change your laughter to mourning and your joy to gloom.
eye leech
she will take care of her child while the mother is working.  she will hold the child on her lap.  have it nurse.
to have sight restored for the blind
but in keeping with his promise we are looking forward to a new heaven and a new earth, the home of righteousness.
when he was twelve years old, they went up to the festival, according to the custom.
blessed is she who has believed that the lord would fulfill his promises to her!”
the ambung is what the fisherman puts his catch of fish in.
i’m not going to tell stories.
at this they covered their ears and, yelling at the top of their voices, they all rushed at him,
in his defense jesus said to them, “my father is always at his work to this very day, and i too am working.”
ugly
boring insects/weevils (invade wood, bamboo, grains, beans)
when we look at the date of a month, we need to reserve a time when nothing conflicts so that the gathering together will happen.
and again, isaiah says, "the root of jesse will spring up, one who will arise to rule over the nations; the gentiles will hope in him."
nickname
you will go through the field with a fox.
‘no, father abraham,’ he said, ‘but if someone from the dead goes to them, they will repent.’
brown edible fungus that sprouts during rainy months
to divide in half.
drift back on someone
and if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? do not even pagans do that?
if this report gets to the governor, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble.”
the roasted corn is fed to the mother who has newly given birth so that the blood clots will be broken loose and be discharged which were inside her body.
disturbance or interruption
when there are many [grubs] which are making whispery  and gurgling [sounds], then we split knotched pula palm log and we see many grubs which are squirming.
[as for] agot-ot soil, corn will not flourish [in it] the corn will be skinny.
if a person asks when [a couple] was married, someone will respond, they were just married yesterday.
but they paid no attention and went off—one to his field, another to his business.
jesus said to him, “receive your sight; your faith has healed you.”
obese
whoever finds their life will lose it, and whoever loses their life for my sake will find it.
pick up the pangi seeds because we will soak out the poisonous sap.
and when he had taken it, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the lamb. each one had a harp and they were holding golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.
for as lightning that comes from the east is visible even in the west, so will be the coming of the son of man.
which is easier: to say to the paralytic, 'your sins are forgiven,' or to say, 'get up, take your mat and walk'?
burn
the people who lived long ago, they still wore g-strings because they didn't yet have very much material.
peckled chicken
still another angel, who had charge of the fire, came from the altar and called in a loud voice to him who had the sharp sickle, "take your sharp sickle and gather the clusters of grapes from the earth's vine, because its grapes are ripe."
one’s female ward
come here
then jesus declared, "i am the bread of life. he who comes to me will never go hungry, and he who believes in me will never be thirsty.
chicken carrier made of rattan
and whoever lives and believes in me will never die. do you believe this?"
in the fifteenth year of the reign of tiberius caesar—when pontius pilate was governor of judea, herod tetrarch of galilee, his brother philip tetrarch of iturea and traconitis, and lysanias tetrarch of abilene—
to bark.
spill, as water or other liquids
for god did not give us a spirit of timidity, but a spirit of power, of love and of self-discipline.
to have an indented medial line on the stomach (as a female turtle)
stab oneself
this is said to a new guest who is shy to take very much food: "eat up!"
wipe away
to use something as treatment or medicine
watch out for those dogs, those evildoers, those mutilators of the flesh.
anna fell behind her companions on the path because she could not keep up because her legs were short.
for demas, because he loved this world, has deserted me and has gone to thessalonica. crescens has gone to galatia, and titus to dalmatia.
after paul and silas came out of the prison, they went to lydia's house, where they met with the brothers and encouraged them. then they left.
likewise, the bulanbulan “artificial moon” plant glows when it is dark. it’s flowers are bright.
in the same way, was not even rahab the prostitute considered righteous for what she did when she gave lodging to the spies and sent them off in a different direction?
tsk
short and squat
song style used to tell a story
noodles.
but that you may know that the son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins . . . ." he said to the paralytic, "i tell you, get up, take your mat and go home."
similar to a molar in shape
nor did we eat anyone’s food without paying for it. on the contrary, we worked night and day, laboring and toiling so that we would not be a burden to any of you.
“how then were your eyes opened?” they asked.
for a younger rooster to develop spurs up to an inch in length.
because god wanted to make the unchanging nature of his purpose very clear to the heirs of what was promised, he confirmed it with an oath.
so get up and go downstairs. do not hesitate to go with them, for i have sent them.”
jesus said, "this voice was for your benefit, not mine.
all the angels were standing around the throne and around the elders and the four living creatures. they fell down on their faces before the throne and worshiped god,
to reserve or have "dibs" on something so someone else will not get it first.
praise
land that is mostly flat but has some hills like the nauli area
if it sinks to the bottom, it goes to the bottom of the water/river.
paul wanted to appear before the crowd, but the disciples would not let him.
and that in this matter no one should wrong or take advantage of a brother or sister. the lord will punish all those who commit such sins, as we told you and warned you before.
this man was seized by the jews and they were about to kill him, but i came with my troops and rescued him, for i had learned that he is a roman citizen.
why not say—as some slanderously claim that we say—“let us do evil that good may result”? their condemnation is just!
judas son of james, and judas iscariot, who became a traitor.
to whimper or whine (e.g., a dog whining when unhappy).
to rise, as when water in a river, or tide, increases
to get at, or be effective against, as an illness.
whoever is ashamed of me and my words, the son of man will be ashamed of them when he comes in his glory and in the glory of the father and of the holy angels.
don't
we’ll finish drying the rice
that which is thrown.
not at all! let god be true, and every human being a liar. as it is written: “so that you may be proved right when you speak and prevail when you judge.”
simultaneously
protrude
that
the commander took the young man by the hand, drew him aside and asked, "what is it you want to tell me?"
philip, however, appeared at azotus and traveled about, preaching the gospel in all the towns until he reached caesarea.
if they still refuse to listen, tell it to the church; and if they refuse to listen even to the church, treat them as you would a pagan or a tax collector.
kind of large hornbill with a black body and light tan head
"what things?" he asked.
“the lord has done this for me,” she said. “in these days he has shown his favor and taken away my disgrace among the people.”
for the time will come when you will say, 'blessed are the barren women, the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed!'
if there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even christ has been raised.
immediately jesus knew in his spirit that this was what they were thinking in their hearts, and he said to them, "why are you thinking these things?
if we make a shallow well on the beach, we place sand there so that the debris will be filtered out.
“what do you want me to do for you?” “lord, i want to see,” he replied.
silt
to teach to a person or animal how to do something.
lance the boil so [the pus] will escape.
for i received from the lord what i also passed on to you: the lord jesus, on the night he was betrayed, took bread,
for the law of moses has been preached in every city from the earliest times and is read in the synagogues on every sabbath.”
kind of small bird
jesus left there and went to his hometown, accompanied by his disciples.
the [halves of] the papaya [divided] unevenly.
the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are ceremonially unclean sanctify them so that they are outwardly clean.
while paul was waiting for them in athens, he was greatly distressed to see that the city was full of idols.
"it is written," he said to them, " 'my house will be a house of prayer' ; but you have made it 'a den of robbers.' "
sunny, dry weather
we can give them a free gift when they return from far off.
when he had finished praying, jesus left with his disciples and crossed the kidron valley. on the other side there was a garden, and he and his disciples went into it.
marry one’s sibling (incest)
“sir,” the woman said, “i can see that you are a prophet.
your brother has come,' he replied, 'and your father has killed the fattened calf because he has him back safe and sound.'
the apostles were brought in and made to appear before the sanhedrin to be questioned by the high priest.
when the sun goes down, it begins to become dark.
junction of a river
something white on an uncircumcised child's penis which separates the flesh from the foreskin and makes circumcision easier.
the person who dries rice in the sun frequently stirs and spreads it around.
leave something lying around unprotected.
there is great value if we obey our father.
nails.
but food does not bring us near to god; we are no worse if we do not eat, and no better if we do.
swing by one’s hands from a tree vine
when the apostles in jerusalem heard that samaria had accepted the word of god, they sent peter and john to samaria.
not that i am looking for a gift, but i am looking for what may be credited to your account.
steady rain
the brightness of a glow is faint.
the men cut the field, working side by side.
when they come from the marketplace they do not eat unless they wash. and they observe many other traditions, such as the washing of cups, pitchers and kettles. )
“when he has brought out all his own, he goes on ahead of them, and his sheep follow him because they know his voice.”
aim
i do not set aside the grace of god, for if righteousness could be gained through the law, christ died for nothing!"
he is always tossing and turning because his pain is excessive.
be careful not to practice your righteousness in front of others to be seen by them. if you do, you will have no reward from your father in heaven.
even to this day when moses is read, a veil covers their hearts.
wave offering using a chicken
those who escorted paul brought him to athens and then left with instructions for silas and timothy to join him as soon as possible.
turtle
each of the four living creatures had six wings and was covered with eyes all around, even under his wings. day and night they never stop saying: "holy, holy, holy is the lord god almighty, who was, and is, and is to come."
plug [cover??] the waterpole.
if we ask about it, we won't go inside the house if their men are not there so that we won’t be falsely accused.
accomplish, finish
the apostles and elders met to consider this question.
and with many other words john exhorted the people and proclaimed the good news to them.
kind of bamboo
inadvertently caught
to be missing teeth
as paul discoursed on righteousness, self-control and the judgment to come, felix was afraid and said, "that's enough for now! you may leave. when i find it convenient, i will send for you."
but the lord stood at my side and gave me strength, so that through me the message might be fully proclaimed and all the gentiles might hear it. and i was delivered from the lion's mouth.
but jesus made no reply, not even to a single charge—to the great amazement of the governor.
as it was in the days of noah, so it will be at the coming of the son of man.
he was given power to make war against the saints and to conquer them. and he was given authority over every tribe, people, language and nation.
carry on back.
unseasoned (as wood)
promise
dungus is green tobacco.  it’s name is salingsing.
nod one’s head in agreement.
it has always been my ambition to preach the gospel where christ was not known, so that i would not be building on someone else's foundation.
herod had been quarreling with the people of tyre and sidon; they now joined together and sought an audience with him. having secured the support of blastus, the king’s chamberlain, they asked for peace, because they depended on the king’s country for their food supply.
and he gave orders to stop the chariot. then both philip and the eunuch went down into the water, and philip baptized him.
in the law it is written: "through men of strange tongues and through the lips of foreigners i will speak to this people, but even then they will not listen to me," says the lord.
a person who reads a book, opens it up to read.
and when the centurion, who stood there in front of jesus, heard his cry and saw how he died, he said, "surely this man was the son of god!"
in him we were also chosen, having been predestined according to the plan of him who works out everything in conformity with the purpose of his will,  in order that we, who were the first to put our hope in christ, might be for the praise of his glory.
so that your daily life may win the respect of outsiders and so that you will not be dependent on anybody.
you have made them to be a kingdom and priests to serve our god, and they will reign on the earth."
there are children who eat and then there is a lot of food which is dropped onto the floor.
the people of jerusalem and their rulers did not recognize jesus, yet in condemning him they fulfilled the words of the prophets that are read every sabbath.
be pinched between two objects
to develop algae or moss
he longed to fill his stomach with the pods that the pigs were eating, but no one gave him anything.
catch,
for he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet. 26the last enemy to b
in him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the lord.
jesus replied: "a certain man was preparing a great banquet and invited many guests.
then he returned to the disciples and said to them, “are you still sleeping and resting? look, the hour has come, and the son of man is delivered into the hands of sinners.
a pattern on carved combs
it's like ann joy whose illness was difficult. we lost hope because she could no longer live.
to squash or crush by squeezing, sitting, or stepping on
how is/are (asking how someone is doing)
it should have been large, but it’s small.
when there is someone to take care of a child, the mother can get away by herself.
when we catch large fish, we just  roast some until partially cooked so that it will become stiff and not be wasted.
tinny, clattering sound
outside marks of a tattoo
dry season
remember jesus christ, raised from the dead, descended from david. this is my gospel,
fan, as a fire
cut up into small pieces
for titus not only welcomed our appeal, but he is coming to you with much enthusiasm and on his own initiative.
that monkey is a thief.
one of those days jesus went out to a mountainside to pray, and spent the night praying to god.
even as i try to please everybody in every way. for i am not seeking my own good but the good of many, so that they may be saved.
but if the unbeliever leaves, let it be so. the brother or the sister is not bound in such circumstances; god has called us to live in peace.
“to the angel of the church in thyatira write: these are the words of the son of god, whose eyes are like blazing fire and whose feet are like burnished bronze.
and forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
communicate with spirits
if we cross swift water, we have to step firmly when crossing because we will be pushed over as it is foaming.
durian fruit
however, i consider my life worth nothing to me, if only i may finish the race and complete the task the lord jesus has given me--the task of testifying to the gospel of god's grace.
one wouldn't say the liboganon river was at high tide unless all of the flat area has been completely [covered] by flooding.
hunger
skin abrasion
he said to them, "go into all the world and preach the good news to all creation.
i am going to send you what my father has promised; but stay in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high."
baby blanket
then jesus declared, "i am the bread of life. he who comes to me will never go hungry, and he who believes in me will never be thirsty.
but you, man of god, flee from all this, and pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, endurance and gentleness.
then the devil left him, and angels came and attended him.
expression of shame, "shame on you"
they replied, “it has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and you are going to raise it in three days?”
if two children have fought with each other, [their relationship] won't develop because they are now fighting.
deceive in order to kill someone
then jesus went with his disciples to a place called gethsemane, and he said to them, “sit here while i go over there and pray.”
"do you see all these great buildings?" replied jesus. "not one stone here will be left on another; every one will be thrown down."
some time ago theudas appeared, claiming to be somebody, and about four hundred men rallied to him. he was killed, all his followers were dispersed, and it all came to nothing.
break off at stem and fall
today
because of these, the wrath of god is coming.
they will fall by the sword and will be taken as prisoners to all the nations. jerusalem will be trampled on by the gentiles until the times of the gentiles are fulfilled.
though i am free and belong to no one, i have made myself a slave to everyone, to win as many as possible.
and now what are you waiting for? get up, be baptized and wash your sins away, calling on his name.'
but they kept shouting, "crucify him! crucify him!"
when they heard him speak to them in aramaic, they became very quiet. then paul said:
for now we really live, since you are standing firm in the lord.
carry in mouth, as an animal.
chopped
to identify, such as to narrow down to the one person whom one would marry.
for moses said, 'honor your father and your mother,' and, 'anyone who curses his father or mother must be put to death.'
that
when we are slashing rattan and it hasn’t yet separated [from the vine] we continue cutting it until it has been  severed.
the bones haven’t grown together yet.
when he said this, all his opponents were humiliated, but the people were delighted with all the wonderful things he was doing.
land tax of 25 centavos or a can of tipaka.
two other men, both criminals, were also led out with him to be executed.
anyone can pass through the airstrip.
“what do you think about the messiah? whose son is he?” “the son of david,” they replied.
deny
but he gave them strict orders not to tell who he was.
red betel spittle
"you do not want to leave too, do you?" jesus asked the twelve.
flat land
smooth breath, feeling of peace
such large crowds gathered around him that he got into a boat and sat in it, while all the people stood on the shore.
"he committed no sin, and no deceit was found in his mouth."
high water
and i saw an angel coming down out of heaven, having the key to the abyss and holding in his hand a great chain.
from troas we put out to sea and sailed straight for samothrace, and the next day we went on to neapolis.
we would like to request please that you take this for us-excl please.
“go,” he told him, “wash in the pool of siloam” (this word means “sent”). so the man went and washed, and came home seeing.
stem of a plant such as sweet potato
emotionally distraught
choke
whoever has will be given more, and they will have an abundance. whoever does not have, even what they have will be taken from them.
the punishment inflicted on him by the majority is sufficient.
this is how we know what love is: jesus christ laid down his life for us. and we ought to lay down our lives for our brothers.
why are you cursing  me?
night, nighttime
but eagerly desire the greater gifts. and now i will show you the most excellent way.
the rats will propagate; it mated with another rat which was not the same as itself.
for since the creation of the world god’s invisible qualities—his eternal power and divine nature—have been clearly seen, being understood from what has been made, so that people are without excuse.
when he had finished washing their feet, he put on his clothes and returned to his place. “do you understand what i have done for you?” he asked them.
if there are two people who are going downriver by raft and one goes ahead of the other, the one left behind will chase the one which got ahead and will catch up with him.
instead he went out and began to talk freely, spreading the news. as a result, jesus could no longer enter a town openly but stayed outside in lonely places. yet the people still came to him from everywhere.
explode
therefore you do not lack any spiritual gift as you eagerly wait for our lord jesus christ to be revealed.
by standing firm you will gain life.
an
“all this i will give you,” he said, “if you will bow down and worship me.”
mud fish
jesus knew that the father had put all things under his power, and that he had come from god and was returning to god;
on the third day, they threw the ship's tackle overboard with their own hands.
night and day, whether he sleeps or gets up, the seed sprouts and grows, though he does not know how.
the grace of the lord jesus christ be with your spirit. amen.
"yes, lord," she told him, "i believe that you are the christ, the son of god, who was to come into the world."
undergo a change of circumstances
now then, at the resurrection, whose wife will she be of the seven, since all of them were married to her?”
“but rabbi,” they said, “a short while ago the jews there tried to stone you, and yet you are going back?”
to sit or squat
it is as though [something] triggers our thinking.
rib
bad sign
those people are zealous to win you over, but for no good. what they want is to alienate you from us, so that you may have zeal for them.
when we returned to patil, the bag dropped down onto the path, so we returned looking for it, and we retraced our steps so that we would see it.
so if i come, i will call attention to what he is doing, gossiping maliciously about us. not satisfied with that, he refuses to welcome the brothers. he also stops those who want to do so and puts them out of the church.
upper back
echo
fall flat on one’s face on the ground.
you are doing the things your own father does." "we are not illegitimate children," they protested. "the only father we have is god himself."
ghost
and i heard the altar respond: “yes, lord god almighty, true and just are your judgments.”
we are alive.
turn around
give the portion to brother-in-law.
“i am not referring to all of you; i know those i have chosen. but this is to fulfill this passage of scripture: ‘he who shared my bread has turned against me.’”
the eye cannot say to the hand, "i don't need you!" and the head cannot say to the feet, "i don't need you!"
then paul said to him, “god will strike you, you whitewashed wall! you sit there to judge me according to the law, yet you yourself violate the law by commanding that i be struck!”
when jesus got out of the boat, a man with an evil spirit came from the tombs to meet him.
after spending some time there, they were sent off by the believers with the blessing of peace to return to those who had sent them.
he/she is experiencing malaria.
now jesus had not yet entered the village, but was still at the place where martha had met him.
and he will send his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of the heavens to the other.
then he told them many things in parables, saying: “a farmer went out to sow his seed.
and they crucified him. dividing up his clothes, they cast lots to see what each would get.
obey your leaders and submit to their authority. they keep watch over you as men who must give an account. obey them so that their work will be a joy, not a burden, for that would be of no advantage to you.
mary wasn't a true foreigner because she mearly slept [somewhere] for one night.
creek to the north west of mansalinow, and across the river
i care very little if i am judged by you or by any human court; indeed, i do not even judge myself.
if we are careful about our conduct, our lives will be orderly.
fireplace
to scoop with both hands cupped
communicate with spirits
a piece of material or clothing held in each of one's hands during a dance.
wooden stakes or pointed sticks
wilderness
to have a secret.
but jesus answered, "no more of this!" and he touched the man's ear and healed him.
head of grain as of millet or rice
you foolish man, do you want evidence that faith without deeds is useless ?
to choke on something
woe to them! they have taken the way of cain; they have rushed for profit into balaam's error; they have been destroyed in korah's rebellion.
so the word of god spread. the number of disciples in jerusalem increased rapidly, and a large number of priests became obedient to the faith.
then they asked him, "what must we do to do the works god requires?"
no, i beat my body and make it my slave so that after i have preached to others, i myself will not be disqualified for the prize.
there is only one lawgiver and judge, the one who is able to save and destroy. but you--who are you to judge your neighbor?
furry stemmed and leafed tree.
that god was reconciling the world to himself in christ, not counting people’s sins against them. and he has committed to us the message of reconciliation.
have white spots on ones hands
the ashes will become dust if they blow/are carried by the wind.
when they came to the home of the synagogue ruler, jesus saw a commotion, with people crying and wailing loudly.
i counsel you to buy from me gold refined in the fire, so you can become rich; and white clothes to wear, so you can cover your shameful nakedness; and salve to put on your eyes, so you can see.
cover
fragrant
the head of a turtle is pulled back and inside its body.
decorative ear plug
always learning but never able to come to a knowledge of the truth.
through him everyone who believes is set free from every sin, a justification you were not able to obtain under the law of moses.
this was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet isaiah:
rather, we have renounced secret and shameful ways; we do not use deception, nor do we distort the word of god. on the contrary, by setting forth the truth plainly we commend ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of god.
what, then, shall we say in response to these things? if god is for us, who can be against us?
sour; to have one’s teeth set on edge from a scraping sound.
paul, a servant of christ jesus, called to be an apostle and set apart for the gospel of god—
now, brothers, i want to remind you of the gospel i preached to you, which you received and on which you have taken your stand.
it’s your own fault
so in christ jesus you are all children of god through faith,
hair or feathers standing on end
a bird or animal used as a decoy
twist.
jesus said this to indicate the kind of death by which peter would glorify god. then he said to him, “follow me!”
inform the people at magimon when there are police here at mansalinow.
the headdress of the of the love bird is red but the extention [of the headdress] there at the back of its neck is green.
your eye is the lamp of your body. when your eyes are good, your whole body also is full of light. but when they are bad, your body also is full of darkness.
if i am speaking and there is a person who interrupts my speech, he messes it up. if someone overrides [another's words] with his words, it is disrespectful
the one who sows to please his sinful nature, from that nature will reap destruction; the one who sows to please the spirit, from the spirit will reap eternal life.
satiated
“i have brought you glory on earth by finishing the work you gave me to do.”
whoever welcomes a prophet as a prophet will receive a prophet’s reward, and whoever welcomes a righteous person as a righteous person will receive a righteous person’s reward.
lift up both hands
name of a river and/or the village on this river which is just south of maambago.
a kind of camote (yellowish-red inside and out)
and, moreover, that the gentiles might glorify god for his mercy. as it is written: “therefore i will praise you among the gentiles; i will sing the praises of your name.”
hoarse.
small melon
if concerning a house which needs to be raised, it is jacked up slowly because it is necessary to block the space [resulting from the lift].
so, because jesus was doing these things on the sabbath, the jewish leaders began to persecute him.
for kings and all those in authority, that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness.
and when she finds it, she calls her friends and neighbors together and says, 'rejoice with me; i have found my lost coin.'
you’d be slashed into pieces if you were near me.
he is not here; he has risen! remember how he told you, while he was still with you in galilee:
therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey its evil desires.
when the mother of a child goes off to weed [her field], she leaves her child in the care of someone else and that person watches over him/her.
indignant because jesus had healed on the sabbath, the synagogue ruler said to the people, "there are six days for work. so come and be healed on those days, not on the sabbath."
this news about jesus spread throughout judea and the surrounding country.
true,
yes, father, for this is what you were pleased to do.
to be alive.
be at war
pig’s house.
the monkey fell in the water
for each one should carry his own load.
when the ten heard about this, they were indignant with the two brothers.
flock to
hit the mark.
to do.
change clothes
the person who was given responsibility to feed the pig did not consent to give the half of the piglets to the owner.
as they were walking along the road, a man said to him, "i will follow you wherever you go."
“it has been said, ‘anyone who divorces his wife must give her a certificate of divorce.’
that is what remains
to drag, haul, pull, tow
cock head to one side, as a dog when listening
it doesn’t matter how many there are
“and i will ask the father, and he will give you another advocate to help you and be with you forever—”
hoof
if we have something to be sewn, we give the payment ahead of time because we will rush its sewing.
shaman, one who contacts the spirit world.
opps
but when john rebuked herod the tetrarch because of his marriage to herodias, his brother’s wife, and all the other evil things he had done,
kind of sugarcane
jesus did not let him, but said, "go home to your family and tell them how much the lord has done for you, and how he has had mercy on you."
“yes, he does,” he replied. when peter came into the house, jesus was the first to speak. “what do you think, simon?” he asked. “from whom do the kings of the earth collect duty and taxes—from their own children or from others?”
woe to you, blind guides! you say, ‘if anyone swears by the temple, it means nothing; but anyone who swears by the gold of the temple is bound by that oath.’
for whoever is not against us is for us.
the dump truck which delivered the rocks, then spills them out.
bank of river; beach
and then see
one of them, when he saw he was healed, came back, praising god in a loud voice.
come from
i am obligated both to greeks and non-greeks, both to the wise and the foolish.
bamboo jew’s harp
not only so, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the spirit, groan inwardly as we wait eagerly for our adoption to sonship, the redemption of our bodies.
respond to an invitation
as for the manobo's cross-like symbol, it has two crosspieces of wood and is used to mark a field to be cut.
become warm and prickly
we rebuke them with, “what are you whispering about? go to sleep now because it is already late at night.”
become unconscious; coma
so in everything, do to others what you would have them do to you, for this sums up the law and the prophets.
she assumes that she will accompany you to nasuli.
for who makes you different from anyone else? what do you have that you did not receive? and if you did receive it, why do you boast as though you did not?
“do not harm the land or the sea or the trees until we put a seal on the foreheads of the servants of our god.”
and because he was a tentmaker as they were, he stayed and worked with them.
but the jerusalem that is above is free, and she is our mother.
to uproot, remove old camotes
“their feet are swift to shed blood;
contrary to a fact.
they will cause [the people] to be taken by surprise and then no one will be able to rescue them.
the wind blows wherever it pleases. you hear its sound, but you cannot tell where it comes from or where it is going. so it is with everyone born of the spirit.”
bushy (hair); spread out (grains, feathers)
knot (thread/rope)
so when the crowd had gathered, pilate asked them, “which one do you want me to release to you: jesus barabbas, or jesus who is called the messiah?”
to proclaim the year of the lord’s favor.”
quit talking because i will get fed up with you and i will happen to react in an undesirable manner against you.
i cannot bear this illness of mine because it has [lasted] a long time.
in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
i was able to catch up with him.
yet it was good of you to share in my troubles.
something that is able to make one feel better.
twin.
and asked them, “did you receive the holy spirit when you believed?” they answered, “no, we have not even heard that there is a holy spirit.”
be joyful in hope, patient in affliction, faithful in prayer.
jesus, knowing that they intended to come and make him king by force, withdrew again to a mountain by himself.
bait
for false christs and false prophets will appear and perform signs and miracles to deceive the elect--if that were possible.
intestinal worm of a fish.
it is written: ‘and he was numbered with the transgressors and i tell you that this must be fulfilled in me. yes, what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment. those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads and saying, "so! you who are going to destroy the temple and build it in three days,
“truly i tell you,” he continued, “no prophet is accepted in his hometown.
stroke or pet an animal
small, flying insects that are especially prevalent in rainy weather and warm around outside the houses.
on the contrary, they recognized that i had been entrusted with the task of preaching the gospel to the uncircumcised, just as peter had been to the circumcised.
when morning came, he called his disciples to him and chose twelve of them, whom he also designated apostles:
to be cheated; suffer loss in bargain or exchange.
limestone
night insects
because of the crowd he told his disciples to have a small boat ready for him, to keep the people from crowding him.
green tobacco
there were many people who wore g-strings at that time long ago.
to start a fire by making a sawing motion to produce friction and heat
kind of edible tree fruit
then the disciples understood that he was talking to them about john the baptist.
as was the earthly man, so are those who are of the earth; and as is the man from heaven, so also are those who are of heaven.
crosswise direction
thin flakes, as of skin, or from eyes
pine
be pinched between two objects
if there is someone whom we capture, we say, “don’t resist because you are without recourse for you are surrounded.”
a damolugan lizard is roasted and fed to a child as a remedy for that which is making him/her thin.
to spear
the things that mark an apostle--signs, wonders and miracles--were done among you with great perseverance.
famous.
storage shelter
name of a creek and a village
the workers who were hired about five in the afternoon came and each received a denarius.
"does our law condemn anyone without first hearing him to find out what he is doing?"
rather, as it is written: "those who were not told about him will see, and those who have not heard will understand."
bird
when they went across the lake, the disciples forgot to take bread.
water which does not flow has been dammed up.
not that we lord it over your faith, but we work with you for your joy, because it is by faith you stand firm.
your lie
offend
when we cut down vines for a useful purpose, we cut off the stalks lit. body of the rattan and we take them.
“for i gave them the words you gave me and they accepted them. they knew with certainty that i came from you, and they believed that you sent me.”
wild chicken
there is a person who teaches his dog how to hunt for wild pigs.
therefore, the kingdom of heaven is like a king who wanted to settle accounts with his servants.
and while they were eating, he said, “truly i tell you, one of you will betray me.”
they had tails with stingers, like scorpions, and in their tails they had power to torment people for five months.
first, i will take your horse and then the next day you will go to my house and ask if i have anything to use as payment.
the municipal town of kapalong in davao province on the liboganon river.
on the fourteenth night we were still being driven across the adriatic sea, when about midnight the sailors sensed they were approaching land.
this is the message you heard from the beginning: we should love one another.
split
to slice.
during those days another large crowd gathered. since they had nothing to eat, jesus called his disciples to him and said,
the jews gathered around him, saying, "how long will you keep us in suspense? if you are the christ, tell us plainly."
if we live in a village, at each house there is a divider which is a fence which is the boundary.
to slap
try clothing on someone
they were not given power to kill them, but only to torture them for five months. and the agony they suffered was like that of the sting of a scorpion when it strikes a man.
carry on
fall or slide downhill
water thrush
red hot coals.
mussed up (as of hair)
female pig or piglet
hide
and god is able to make all grace abound to you, so that in all things at all times, having all that you need, you will abound in every good work.
haul downriver
are not five sparrows sold for two pennies ? yet not one of them is forgotten by god.
small covered basket
brother of a girl; male cousin.
look back over one’s shoulder
"do not stop him," jesus said. "no one who does a miracle in my name can in the next moment say anything bad about me,
that all may honor the son just as they honor the father. whoever does not honor the son does not honor the father, who sent him.
open
but the pharisees and the teachers of the law muttered, "this man welcomes sinners and eats with them."
a certain man from cyrene, simon, the father of alexander and rufus, was passing by on his way in from the country, and they forced him to carry the cross.
i dumped out the corn; it was no good.
when they came to jesus, they saw the man who had been possessed by the legion of demons, sitting there, dressed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
the middle of the space under the house.
asking
means of defense
to have to hunker down (fearing capture)
small goose
punishment
a nest or bed of vegetation made by an animal to be used as a birthing place
it took my place
this is why it says: “when he ascended on high, he took many captives and gave gifts to his people.”
yet he has not left himself without testimony: he has shown kindness by giving you rain from heaven and crops in their seasons; he provides you with plenty of food and fills your hearts with joy.”
as soon as
now at the feast the jews were watching for him and asking, "where is that man?"
i have no one else like him, who takes a genuine interest in your welfare.
and he received circumcision as a sign, a seal of the righteousness that he had by faith while he was still uncircumcised. so then, he is the father of all who believe but have not been circumcised, in order that righteousness might be credited to them.
he took a little child and had him stand among them. taking him in his arms, he said to them,
to make her holy, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word,
if anyone does not obey our instruction in this letter, take special note of him. do not associate with him, in order that he may feel ashamed.
what i mean is this: one of you says, "i follow paul"; another, "i follow apollos"; another, "i follow cephas "; still another, "i follow christ."
when jesus landed and saw a large crowd, he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd. so he began teaching them many things.
do you not know that your bodies are members of christ himself? shall i then take the members of christ and unite them with a prostitute? never!
by faith abraham, when god tested him, offered isaac as a sacrifice. he who had received the promises was about to sacrifice his one and only son, even though god had said to him, "it is through isaac that your offspring will be reckoned."
nudge
give someone the willies
"then i asked, 'who are you, lord?'
and so after waiting patiently, abraham received what was promised.
they traveled through the whole island until they came to paphos. there they met a jewish sorcerer and false prophet named bar-jesus,
nara tree
he did not discriminate between us and them, for he purified their hearts by faith.
word used to shoo dogs.
to fish with a spear, as to wait and watch for them to come so one can spear them.
now the berean jews were of more noble character than those in thessalonica, for they received the message with great eagerness and examined the scriptures every day to see if what paul said was true.
when the chief priests and the pharisees heard jesus’ parables, they knew he was talking about them.
this week at the end?? of may, i would like to try to return to maambago, but the fares to the vehicles have gone up.
the water is returning to its place; receding
a type of cane
if perfection could have been attained through the levitical priesthood (for on the basis of it the law was given to the people), why was there still need for another priest to come--one in the order of melchizedek, not in the order of aaron?
there was a person who was looking for someone to hire because he had twenty sacks of corn but no one to be his partner when he traveled downriver on his raft.
so that by god's will i may come to you with joy and together with you be refreshed.
blue
to be reached
splatter, as hot grease
if one frequently wins at gambling, he always hits the jackpot.
to bubble
another of his disciples, andrew, simon peter's brother, spoke up,
wooden stakes or pointed sticks
lymph nodes in the neck, armpit, or groin
happen
if anyone wants to be contentious about this, we have no other practice-- nor do the churches of god.
to wrinkle one's forehead (when worried or angry)
"am i leading a rebellion," said jesus, "that you have come out with swords and clubs to capture me?
all the people answered, “his blood is on us and on our children!”
whenever the living creatures give glory, honor and thanks to him who sits on the throne and who lives for ever and ever,
it’s bad to marry when still a child.
suffer a surface cut
ballad or chanting syle of song.
i am thankful that i did not baptize any of you except crispus and gaius,
nothing
for what we preach is not ourselves, but jesus christ as lord, and ourselves as your servants for jesus’ sake.
to suffer a negative result of being interrupted
beat, whip or hit as with a switch, small stick, belt or rope. can be a single stroke or several.
walk, roam, go
so if the son sets you free, you will be free indeed.
jesus answered: “watch out that no one deceives you.
an idol
the raft may capsize.
the clothes will be swept away.
by myself i can do nothing; i judge only as i hear, and my judgment is just, for i seek not to please myself but him who sent me.
basket, square or round basket with lid
"but not during the feast," they said, "or the people may riot."
i’m your housegirl.
as you go, proclaim this message: ‘the kingdom of heaven has come near.’
he replied, “go into the city to a certain man and tell him, ‘the teacher says: my appointed time is near. i am going to celebrate the passover with my disciples at your house.’”
the mother would say something like, “get up because it is daytime.
when they heard this, they praised god. then they said to paul: “you see, brother, how many thousands of jews have believed, and all of them are zealous for the law.”
a man called barabbas was in prison with the insurrectionists who had committed murder in the uprising.
on the appointed day herod, wearing his royal robes, sat on his throne and delivered a public address to the people.
so he made a whip out of cords, and drove all from the temple courts, both sheep and cattle; he scattered the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables.
and do this, understanding the present time. the hour has come for you to wake up from your slumber, because our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed.
my bolo won’t cut.
cross one’s thighs.
salmon the father of boaz, whose mother was rahab, boaz the father of obed, whose mother was ruth, obed the father of jesse,
while he was still speaking a crowd came up, and the man who was called judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. he approached jesus to kiss him,
older sibling or relative
the dove is a herald
moreover, demons came out of many people, shouting, “you are the son of god!” but he rebuked them and would not allow them to speak, because they knew he was the messiah.
to one he gave five bags of gold, to another two bags, and to another one bag, each according to his ability. then he went on his journey.
make something wet
after he had said this, jesus was troubled in spirit and testified, "i tell you the truth, one of you is going to betray me."
follow the very same path as another
as you hold out the word of life--in order that i may boast on the day of christ that i did not run or labor for nothing.
where were you born?
suffering.
shake one’s head
for the eyes of the lord are on the righteous and his ears are attentive to their prayer, but the face of the lord is against those who do evil."
then they asked him, “where is your father?”
we’ll surround the wild pigs.
farewell gift given to a guest or relative
thumb
it's as if one cannot discover the meaning.
soft
stick or bar used in weaving
to be eaten by evil spirit
everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, but he on whom it falls will be crushed."
slower
he replied to him, “who is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
for i am the least of the apostles and do not even deserve to be called an apostle, because i persecuted the church of god.
bird blind consisting of a tree-house
superlative particle; most, very much, especially.
become darkened
having dark holes
jesus has been found worthy of greater honor than moses, just as the builder of a house has greater honor than the house itself.
burdensome
i am sending him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are, and that he may encourage you.
submerged just under the surface of the water
"behold, i am coming soon! my reward is with me, and i will give to everyone according to what he has done.
[some manuscripts include: “for an angel of the lord went down at certain seasons into the pool and stirred up the water; whoever then first, after the stirring of the water, stepped in was made well from whatever disease with which he was afflicted.”]
anyone who lives on milk, being still an infant, is not acquainted with the teaching about righteousness.
surely you have heard about the administration of god’s grace that was given to me for you,
5 cent piece
shave one’s head
powerful due to wealth or status
having canceled the written code, with its regulations, that was against us and that stood opposed to us; he took it away, nailing it to the cross.
but the pharisees and the experts in the law rejected god’s purpose for themselves, because they had not been baptized by john.)
the person, [he] is repeatedly carrying wood on his shoulders to use for building a fire.
cross
male pig
a hole in a tree or stump in which water gathers, used as a drinking hole by animals and people.
after he used [the saw], he loaned it (lit. caused it to be borrowed) again to another person.
therefore, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?”
may our lord jesus christ himself and god our father, who loved us and by his grace gave us eternal encouragement and good hope,  encourage your hearts and strengthen you in every good deed and word.
abdomen
adhere something to another, as a bandage
she’s forcing us [to give in] to her begging.
chicken lice
you know we never used flattery, nor did we put on a mask to cover up greed—god is our witness.
freckled
the sun is bright (bursts forth).
large black coconut beetle
to smooth out and flatten.
squeeze
if god is glorified in him, god will glorify the son in himself, and will glorify him at once.
afflicted by an illness believed to be a result of meeting a long-haired spirit while bathing in a river or stream.
small ant
bolo sheath
that which we would have done at the beginning was supplanted and so then we were distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish what we started out to do.
"blessed is the king who comes in the name of the lord!" "peace in heaven and glory in the highest!"
solomon the father of rehoboam, rehoboam the father of abijah, abijah the father of asa,
potty or bladder
to release, as a trigger of a trap.
he said: “in a certain town there was a judge who neither feared god nor cared what people thought.
if there is no dam (lit dam of water), it is not possible to make rice paddies.
be wavy, have multiple curves
the [color of the] tail of the kawwilì rat becomes white about midway
he told them, "this is what is written: the christ will suffer and rise from the dead on the third day
an angel of the lord appeared to them, and the glory of the lord shone around them, and they were terrified.
as he was scattering the seed, some fell along the path, and the birds came and ate it up.
for this people's heart has become calloused; they hardly hear with their ears, and they have closed their eyes. otherwise they might see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their hearts and turn, and i would heal them.'
“i am a jew, born in tarsus of cilicia, but brought up in this city. i studied under gamaliel and was thoroughly trained in the law of our ancestors. i was just as zealous for god as any of you are today.
so then, brothers and sisters, stand firm and hold fast to the teachings we passed on to you, whether by word of mouth or by letter.
then the disciples understood that he was talking to them about john the baptist.
the child who is wiggley can’t sit still
at that, paul left the council.
craving
but when they arrest you, do not worry about what to say or how to say it. at that time you will be given what to say,
replace
the storm clouds can be shouted away if there is a shaman.
instead, they were longing for a better country--a heavenly one. therefore god is not ashamed to be called their god, for he has prepared a city for them.
keep yourselves in god's love as you wait for the mercy of our lord jesus christ to bring you to eternal life.
stir or spread around, as drying grain on a mat
correct
drawn-up limb, as in a crippled leg or hand
he told them, "this is what is written: the christ will suffer and rise from the dead on the third day
for such people are not serving our lord christ, but their own appetites. by smooth talk and flattery they deceive the minds of naive people.
then judas (not judas iscariot) said, "but, lord, why do you intend to show yourself to us and not to the world?"
any kind of brace whether on a house or piece of furniture
kidnap
each person in a given group wearing a bolo.
and if you lend to those from whom you expect repayment, what credit is that to you? even sinners lend to sinners, expecting to be repaid in full.
"then he said to those standing by, 'take his mina away from him and give it to the one who has ten minas.'
to spear
creep over ground, as sweet potatoes
wiggle, as worms
house post.
not at all meaning the people of this world who are immoral, or the greedy and swindlers, or idolaters. in that case you would have to leave this world.
run an errand
dangerous
jesus said to her, "i am the resurrection and the life. he who believes in me will live, even though he dies;
even if i should choose to boast, i would not be a fool, because i would be speaking the truth. but i refrain, so no one will think more of me than is warranted by what i do or say.
a companion, neighbor, or other person
the lord is not slow in keeping his promise, as some understand slowness. instead he is patient with you, not wanting anyone to perish, but everyone to come to repentance.
even one of their own prophets has said, "cretans are always liars, evil brutes, lazy gluttons."
the cans were used as shingles
as for that person who is persistent, he keeps coming back until he is able to get that for which he was begging.
you did not give me a kiss, but this woman, from the time i entered, has not stopped kissing my feet.
leader
“yes it is, lord,” she said. “even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their master’s table.”
whiskers
slide deliberately, as down a pole
they took palm branches and went out to meet him, shouting, “hosanna! blessed is he who comes in the name of the lord! blessed is the king of israel!”
he warned them not to tell others about him.
envy
your gold and silver are corroded. their corrosion will testify against you and eat your flesh like fire. you have hoarded wealth in the last days.
for when i preach the gospel, i cannot boast, since i am compelled to preach. woe to me if i do not preach the gospel!
afternoon
long, light-colored earthworm
(if anyone does not know how to manage his own family, how can he take care of god’s church?)
even though you have ten thousand guardians in christ, you do not have many fathers, for in christ jesus i became your father through the gospel.
quiet, shy
yet you refuse to come to me to have life.
as for a person who eats a lot, someone would say, "this person is too much who has nothing else to do than to be always eating.
then the woman, seeing that she could not go unnoticed, came trembling and fell at his feet. in the presence of all the people, she told why she had touched him and how she had been instantly healed.
bless your heart for feeling lonely for me.
roll eyes
emotionally fragile or unstable; soft-hearted
when you ask, you do not receive, because you ask with wrong motives, that you may spend what you get on your pleasures.
a bird similar to purple martin
pattern your behaviour after his.
greet priscilla and aquila, my co-workers in christ jesus.
uncle
we are from god, and whoever knows god listens to us; but whoever is not from god does not listen to us. this is how we recognize the spirit of truth and the spirit of falsehood
peter asked her, “tell me, is this the price you and ananias got for the land?” “yes,” she said, “that is the price.”
as for that married couple, that is the one which has newly been married but does not yet have an offspring.
abaca bark.
cutting loose the anchors, they left them in the sea and at the same time untied the ropes that held the rudders. then they hoisted the foresail to the wind and made for the beach.
while the man held on to peter and john, all the people were astonished and came running to them in the place called solomon’s colonnade.
"i am," said jesus. "and you will see the son of man sitting at the right hand of the mighty one and coming on the clouds of heaven."
a man is not a jew if he is only one outwardly, nor is circumcision merely outward and physical.
there is only one woman whom he loves.
love for someone
headband or bound scarf of a man
on his arrival, jesus found that lazarus had already been in the tomb for four days.
heart.
hundred
when he saw the crowds, he had compassion on them, because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.
i speak the truth in christ—i am not lying, my conscience confirms it through the holy spirit—  i have great sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart.
lymph nodes in the neck, armpit, or groin
so the son of man is lord even of the sabbath."
he is not here; he has risen! remember how he told you, while he was still with you in galilee:
to call by name
for out of the heart come evil thoughts—murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false testimony, slander.
let's not take up residence with women. we will be cursed.
those who accepted his message were baptized, and about three thousand were added to their number that day.
feel sorry for
as for everyone who comes to me and hears my words and puts them into practice, i will show you what they are like.  they are like a man building a house, who dug down deep and laid the foundation on rock. when a flood came, the torrent struck that house but could not shake it, because it was well built.
impet’s tail isn’t still a minute
leap, as a dog leaping for an object
instead we should write to them, telling them to abstain from food polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from the meat of strangled animals and from blood.
wattle of chicken (red part at chin).
crazy
denim is sturdy.
distinct, exaggerated speech, slow
sugar
gun
i hope, therefore, to send him as soon as i see how things go with me.
he told them: “take nothing for the journey—no staff, no bag, no bread, no money, no extra shirt.
a warning
moved by current
treat well, be kind
walk vigorously
then jesus told them, “this very night you will all fall away on account of me, for it is written: ‘i will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’
the wall was made of jasper, and the city of pure gold, as pure as glass.
pinch each other
this cloth is my cherished possession.
by all this we are encouraged.
since, then, we know what it is to fear the lord, we try to persuade others. what we are is plain to god, and i hope it is also plain to your conscience.
and to present her to himself as a radiant church, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless.
truly i tell you, anyone who will not receive the kingdom of god like a little child will never enter it.”
“i will remain in the world no longer, but they are still in the world, and i am coming to you. holy father, protect them by the power of your name, the name you gave me, so that they may be one as we are one.”
for in the days before the flood, people were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, up to the day noah entered the ark;
and what more shall i say? i do not have time to tell about gideon, barak, samson, jephthah, david, samuel and the prophets,
very early on the first day of the week, just after sunrise, they were on their way to the tomb
if one frequently wins at gambling, he always hits the jackpot.
when jesus heard this, he was amazed and said to those following him, “truly i tell you, i have not found anyone in israel with such great faith.
in fact, you even put up with anyone who enslaves you or exploits you or takes advantage of you or puts on airs or slaps you in the face.
but not everyone possesses this knowledge. some people are still so accustomed to idols that when they eat sacrificial food they think of it as having been sacrificed to a god, and since their conscience is weak, it is defiled.
jesus called his disciples to him and said, “i have compassion for these people; they have already been with me three days and have nothing to eat. i do not want to send them away hungry, or they may collapse on the way.”
the black thunderheads, if they become white, they will cause it to rain hard.
ascent
to wiggle, as the movement of many bodies or tails
now the tax collectors and "sinners" were all gathering around to hear him.
the rain dripped through on the rice.
if i get home first, you will be the one to fetch water.
but if you do marry, you have not sinned; and if a virgin marries, she has not sinned. but those who marry will face many troubles in this life, and i want to spare you this.
when evening came, his disciples went down to the lake,
the next day we set sail from there and arrived off kios. the day after that we crossed over to samos, and on the following day arrived at miletus.
when the believers learned of this, they took him down to caesarea and sent him off to tarsus.
in addition, we are sending with them our brother who has often proved to us in many ways that he is zealous, and now even more so because of his great confidence in you.
young men, in the same way be submissive to those who are older. all of you, clothe yourselves with humility
the person who has a rice field that is about to be harvested, clears an area around the field to keep wild pigs out.
you know that when you were pagans, somehow or other you were influenced and led astray to mute idols.
but if we hope for what we do not yet have, we wait for it patiently.
what does scripture say? “abraham believed god, and it was credited to him as righteousness.”
the horses and riders i saw in my vision looked like this: their breastplates were fiery red, dark blue, and yellow as sulfur. the heads of the horses resembled the heads of lions, and out of their mouths came fire, smoke and sulfur.
and then the third married her, and in the same way the seven died, leaving no children.
adhere something to another, as a bandage
"i have told you these things, so that in me you may have peace. in this world you will have trouble. but take heart! i have overcome the world."
jesus commanded them not to tell anyone. but the more he did so, the more they kept talking about it.
the chicken is bled on the altar.
the oath he swore to our father abraham:
when all the people saw him walking and praising god,
it became a steep embankment because the soil was decreased.
talk
whatever you have learned or received or heard from me, or seen in me—put it into practice. and the god of peace will be with you.
father, glorify your name!"
the other disciples followed in the boat, towing the net full of fish, for they were not far from shore, about a hundred yards.
some faced jeers and flogging, while still others were chained and put in prison.
and exchanged the glory of the immortal god for images made to look like a mortal human being and birds and animals and reptiles.
a dog when it gives birth, puppy is the name of its offspring.
blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they will be filled.
his work will be shown for what it is, because the day will bring it to light. it will be revealed with fire, and the fire will test the quality of each man's work.
pierce
shoreline.
look back and forth
even so, when you see all these things, you know that it is near, right at the door.
and he went and lived in a town called nazareth. so was fulfilled what was said through the prophets, that he would be called a nazarene.
then the jews said, "see how he loved him!"
for even if i boast somewhat freely about the authority the lord gave us for building you up rather than pulling you down, i will not be ashamed of it.
the forming of the pattern, that is the agum.
the bongit, okang, kulagu, and pulow owls only call at night. when they hoot, the older people mistakenly think they are evil spirits.
where is the wise man? where is the scholar? where is the philosopher of this age? has not god made foolish the wisdom of the world?
thinking he was in their company, they traveled on for a day. then they began looking for him among their relatives and friends.
be upset
jesus disappeared when he entered because his stones shone as they were filled with light.
when there are many grubs which are making a whispering noise, it lets us know that the [grubs] in the palm trunk have broken through [to each other] knotched palm.
every sabbath he reasoned in the synagogue, trying to persuade jews and greeks.
it doesn't matter that it is small.
slaves, submit yourselves to your masters with all respect, not only to those who are good and considerate, but also to those who are harsh.
plant corn
no one would ??? to go ahead...all the people would be included.
kind of bony, transparent fish
become smaller, as a sore that is healing
the excessively argumentative person won't quit talking.
blessed is she who has believed that the lord would fulfill his promises to her!”
he included him in the fault. he included those who weren't involved.
for we must all appear before the judgment seat of christ, so that each of us may receive what is due us for the things done while in the body, whether good or bad.
real
but, brothers, when we were torn away from you for a short time (in person, not in thought), out of our intense longing we made every effort to see you.
now there is in jerusalem near the sheep gate a pool, which in aramaic is called bethesda and which is surrounded by five covered colonnades.
they were on their way up to jerusalem, with jesus leading the way, and the disciples were astonished, while those who followed were afraid. again he took the twelve aside and told them what was going to happen to him.
test everything. hold on to the good.
hunger for fish or meat
all spoke well of him and were amazed at the gracious words that came from his lips. “isn’t this joseph’s son?” they asked.
he who belongs to god hears what god says. the reason you do not hear is that you do not belong to god."
we drag the rattan when we return to the house.
his parents said this because they were afraid of the jews, for already the jews had decided that anyone who acknowledged that jesus was the christ would be put out of the synagogue.
slow.
if a person has fainted as a result of an illness, we will try to resuscitate him.
we sent timothy, who is our brother and co-worker in god’s service in spreading the gospel of christ, to strengthen and encourage you in your faith,
peaceful, free from trouble
i am glad i can have complete confidence in you.
alveolar click
go ahead, then, and complete what your ancestors started!
that each of you should learn to control your own body in a way that is holy and honorable,
for they had not understood about the loaves; their hearts were hardened.
that’s not a lie.
middle of the night
but when john rebuked herod the tetrarch because of his marriage to herodias, his brother’s wife, and all the other evil things he had done,
bark at
then he went upstairs again and broke bread and ate. after talking until daylight, he left.
when we hear a pig, it grunts. it goes “mmm” and then it runs because it is afraid of people.
first
now jesus was going up to jerusalem. on the way, he took the twelve aside and said to them,
they were not given power to kill them, but only to torture them for five months. and the agony they suffered was like that of the sting of a scorpion when it strikes a man.
still, many in the crowd put their faith in him. they said, "when the christ comes, will he do more miraculous signs than this man?"
cheer
for i testify that they gave as much as they were able, and even beyond their ability. entirely on their own,
fragrant tiny bits of tree roots used in tayun (a traditional preparation)
raft made of wood
to persuade (by talking into) as a girl to sing
leave early
we ought always to thank god for you, brothers and sisters, and rightly so, because your faith is growing more and more, and the love all of you have for one another is increasing.
?
then, leaving her water jar, the woman went back to the town and said to the people,
as for aluminum roofing which is very thin, it easily becomes dented when we step on it while using it to make a roof.
be mindful to give rice to our neighbors.
narrow wooden shield
this is the message you heard from the beginning: we should love one another.
when we have been there for a day, we will continue on to our true destination.
you watch over the dead, your emotional pain accompanies you, you weep and sit in silence. that is when a person does not talk.
on the third day a wedding took place at cana in galilee. jesus’ mother was there,
the next year the [amount of] corn was enough that it could be sold.
after this i saw another angel coming down from heaven. he had great authority, and the earth was illuminated by his splendor.
if anyone destroys god's temple, god will destroy him; for god's temple is sacred, and you are that temple.
pace back and forth in a limited area due to restriction
i have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."
it is still new material.
i hope to see you soon, and we will talk face to face.
the people of israel. theirs is the adoption to sonship; theirs the divine glory, the covenants, the receiving of the law, the temple worship and the promises.
a rat
put it between those
peter looked straight at him, as did john. then peter said, “look at us!”
if there is a landslide (lit. ground which landslides), the trees become uprooted and fall.
durian fruit
if someone wants to get married, he will pursue it relentlessly. he will keep on discussing it with the father until he says yes.
small basket with a lid, made of rattan
start plucking!
but when they entered, they did not find the body of the lord jesus.
part
large water heron or bittern
the largest in a litter.
we know that god spoke to moses, but as for this fellow, we don't even know where he comes from."
in joppa there was a disciple named tabitha (in greek her name is dorcas); she was always doing good and helping the poor.
ability
transfer from the palm of one person to that of another
they were delighted to hear this and promised to give him money. so he watched for an opportunity to hand him over.
the larva of the palasan rattan forms a cocoon by enveloping itself in what it has chewed up, and only then does it change into a beetle.
slide the comb between the shingles
return
hen
a person who makes a recipe from the taro plant, grates coconut with which he makes coconut milk
woe to you, blind guides! you say, ‘if anyone swears by the temple, it means nothing; but anyone who swears by the gold of the temple is bound by that oath.’
mistake someone for another person
to tie up by wrapping something around securely as many crabs or fish in a leaf
as for [the word] aboy “assumption” one can assume correctly or incorrectly.
never be lacking in zeal, but keep your spiritual fervor, serving the lord.
and so do mark, aristarchus, demas and luke, my fellow workers.
chief
her spirit returned, and at once she stood up. then jesus told them to give her something to eat.
jesus said, “do not hold on to me, for i have not yet ascended to the father. go instead to my brothers and tell them, ‘i am ascending to my father and your father, to my god and your god.’”
by faith moses, when he had grown up, refused to be known as the son of pharaoh's daughter.
i assure you before god that what i am writing you is no lie.
as scripture says, “anyone who believes in him will never be put to shame.”
magnet.
weeds.
but the one who stands firm to the end will be saved.
now send men to joppa to bring back a man named simon who is called peter.
flint stone used for starting fire.
with them they sent the following letter: the apostles and elders, your brothers, to the gentile believers in antioch, syria and cilicia: greetings.
to you
weak
when he was placed outside, pharaoh’s daughter took him and brought him up as her own son.
he didn't allow him to take half of those piglets.
choke
to throw a hoop.
her teeth are close together.
will you put this on board?
tendons
those who were about to question him withdrew immediately. the commander himself was alarmed when he realized that he had put paul, a roman citizen, in chains.
for no matter how many promises god has made, they are "yes" in christ. and so through him the "amen" is spoken by us to the glory of god.
we sent timothy, who is our brother and co-worker in god’s service in spreading the gospel of christ, to strengthen and encourage you in your faith,
3rd left string of kobbiung
father
to overwork someone.
apologize
to bend something
go away for a period of time to test one's love
shellfish like a small clam
do not let anyone who delights in false humility and the worship of angels disqualify you for the prize. such a person goes into great detail about what he has seen, and his unspiritual mind puffs him up with idle notions.
have the appearance of something
slow-burning
then he sent other servants to them, more than the first time, and the tenants treated them the same way.
kind of small melon-like fruit.
the samaritan woman said to him, “you are a jew and i am a samaritan woman. how can you ask me for a drink?” (for jews do not associate with samaritans.)
type of song
endure hardship with us like a good soldier of christ jesus.
sugarcane having a greyish pattern.
even as he spoke, many put their faith in him.
cigarette
remember
if those days had not been cut short, no one would survive, but for the sake of the elect those days will be cut short.
therefore what god has joined together, let man not separate."
for john the baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘he has a demon.’
a person who has a uvula, he is able to talk.
“you judge by human standards; i pass judgment on no one.”
the grace of our lord jesus christ be with your spirit, brothers. amen.
when the harvest time approached, he sent his servants to the tenants to collect his fruit.
i was given a reed like a measuring rod and was told, “go and measure the temple of god and the altar, with its worshipers.
force
the fire of the large trees keeps burning/smoldering. it will not be extinguished until the wood is consumed.
then paul answered, “why are you weeping and breaking my heart? i am ready not only to be bound, but also to die in jerusalem for the name of the lord jesus.”
to intentionally make an impression with some object.
who gave himself for our sins to rescue us from the present evil age, according to the will of our god and father,
and free those who all their lives were held in slavery by their fear of death.
and you are proud! shouldn’t you rather have gone into mourning and have put out of your fellowship the man who has been doing this?
remedy, cure, medicine
after this, joseph sent for his father jacob and his whole family, seventy-five in all.
his work will be shown for what it is, because the day will bring it to light. it will be revealed with fire, and the fire will test the quality of each man's work.
“the spirit of the lord is on me, because he has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. he has sent me to proclaim freedom for the prisoners and recovery of sight for the blind, to set the oppressed free,
at that time jesus said, “i praise you, father, lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children.
as it is written: “for your sake we face death all day long; we are considered as sheep to be slaughtered.”
redeem
the corn won’t sprout because the small ants are affecting it.
for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of god,
afterward, as you know, when he wanted to inherit this blessing, he was rejected. he could bring about no change of mind, though he sought the blessing with tears.
choke, as of plants
for though i am absent from you in body, i am present with you in spirit and delight to see how disciplined you are and how firm your faith in christ is.
"woe to you pharisees, because you love the most important seats in the synagogues and greetings in the marketplaces.
an area between two mountains, that is a pass.
to try to scare someone
whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and i in him.
my accusers did not find me arguing with anyone at the temple, or stirring up a crowd in the synagogues or anywhere else in the city.
you will be his witness to all men of what you have seen and heard.
the center/seed which cannot be swallowed like the [seeds of] the mango or the pangi [fruit], those are the only ones which can be sucked on.
do something carefully.
who comforts us in all our troubles, so that we can comfort those in any trouble with the comfort we ourselves receive from god.
but go, tell his disciples and peter, 'he is going ahead of you into galilee. there you will see him, just as he told you.' "
lose hope
lost
but when herod heard this, he said, "john, the man i beheaded, has been raised from the dead!"
without being frightened in any way by those who oppose you. this is a sign to them that they will be destroyed, but that you will be saved--and that by god.
soot
the others won't produce ears.
capsize
stick used to hold onto when undergoing trial in the river
a tree with wide fuzzy leaves
group of smaller stems
husbands, in the same way be considerate as you live with your wives, and treat them with respect as the weaker partner and as heirs with you of the gracious gift of life, so that nothing will hinder your prayers.
nevertheless, god was not pleased with most of them; their bodies were scattered in the wilderness.
when simon saw that the spirit was given at the laying on of the apostles’ hands, he offered them money
intentionally scatter something
talkative (friendly and outgoing)
for it is by grace you have been saved, through faith—and this is not from yourselves, it is the gift of god—
to tighten something; pull taut
a divider
behind the second curtain was a room called the most holy place,
a kind of scraper for smoothing wood or bamboo.
as for the person who is coughing, he can no longer speak out loud because he has become hoarse.
since we live by the spirit, let us keep in step with the spirit.
prison
edible lizard
return to a place
a woman’s cloth bag worn on the back
sober up
some wanted to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him.
enoch, the seventh from adam, prophesied about these men: "see, the lord is coming with thousands upon thousands of his holy ones
he keeps coming back until he can obtain that which he is requesting. it is as though the person from whom he is begging is being forced to give.
there are children who eat and then there is a lot of food which is dropped onto the floor.
it’s call was significant to us.
an inlet [of water] at the ocean, if it has no outlet, it is an inlet which [forms] a lake.
if it is round but has become smaller, it has shrunk.
my sheep listen to my voice; i know them, and they follow me.
in purity, understanding, patience and kindness; in the holy spirit and in sincere love;
roll eyes, cross-eyed
as for a person who has a cough, the one who has a whooping cough is always coughing because his throat is itching.
so if god gave them the same gift he gave us who believed in the lord jesus christ, who was i to think that i could stand in god’s way?”
the chief priests picked up the coins and said, “it is against the law to put this into the treasury, since it is blood money.”
strength
his son by the slave woman was born according to the flesh, but his son by the free woman was born as the result of a divine promise.
who wants all people to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth.
travel
that is what you deserve for being a child who doesn't obey
a finger ring.
in all my prayers for all of you, i always pray with joy
in the past
sing a lament for the dead
his master replied, ‘well done, good and faithful servant! you have been faithful with a few things; i will put you in charge of many things. come and share your master’s happiness!’
ancestors
the son of methuselah, the son of enoch, the son of jared, the son of mahalalel, the son of kenan,
dried out plants on the beach were uprooted and whirled around as they were carried upwards.
you sympathized with those in prison and joyfully accepted the confiscation of your property, because you knew that you yourselves had better and lasting possessions.
“settle matters quickly with your adversary who is taking you to court. do it while you are still together on the way, or your adversary may hand you over to the judge, and the judge may hand you over to the officer, and you may be thrown into prison.
when you come together, it is not the lord's supper you eat,
and again they shouted: “hallelujah! the smoke from her goes up for ever and ever.”
“therefore, my friends, i want you to know that through jesus the forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you.
be on your guard; stand firm in the faith; be men of courage; be strong.
kind of bangkawan used to carry a wild rooster
answer
they’ll plunder our clothing after murdering us.
if you are praising god with your spirit, how can one who finds himself among those who do not understand say "amen" to your thanksgiving, since he does not know what you are saying?
i know that his command leads to eternal life. so whatever i say is just what the father has told me to say."
get up
through jesus, therefore, let us continually offer to god a sacrifice of praise--the fruit of lips that confess his name.
when they came here with me, i did not delay the case, but convened the court the next day and ordered the man to be brought in.
there are people who will hide whose purpose is to scare us so that we will be afraid.
you know that i have not hesitated to preach anything that would be helpful to you but have taught you publicly and from house to house.
at this point festus interrupted paul's defense. "you are out of your mind, paul!" he shouted. "your great learning is driving you insane."
pile up, stack up
it always protects, always trusts, always hopes, always perseveres.
as jesus was coming up out of the water, he saw heaven being torn open and the spirit descending on him like a dove.
poke the rice
if the river has risen, it will become divided in two parts because it has passed into a secondary channel.
but if we have food and clothing, we will be content with that.
[they] are fetching camotes from others.
then the high priest stood up before them and asked jesus, "are you not going to answer? what is this testimony that these men are bringing against you?"
so joseph bought some linen cloth, took down the body, wrapped it in the linen, and placed it in a tomb cut out of rock. then he rolled a stone against the entrance of the tomb.
unit of measure, an arm span
of you
but since they could see the man who had been healed standing there with them, there was nothing they could say.
release a horse into pasture to choose what it will eat
in a loud voice she exclaimed: “blessed are you among women, and blessed is the child you will bear!
her legs were crossing as she was walking
hard, as wood.
salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us—
so then, death is at work in us, but life is at work in you.
take a pinch of something
the man who says, "i know him," but does not do what he commands is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
if our teeth are touching each other, it is difficult to remove the particles of food between the teeth.
not even those who are circumcised obey the law, yet they want you to be circumcised that they may boast about your flesh.
tell someone not to do something
when moses had proclaimed every commandment of the law to all the people, he took the blood of calves, together with water, scarlet wool and branches of hyssop, and sprinkled the scroll and all the people.
and he directed the people to sit down on the grass. taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke the loaves. then he gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the people.
and being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to death-- even death on a cross!
which was not made known to people in other generations as it has now been revealed by the spirit to god’s holy apostles and prophets.
we continually remember before our god and father your work produced by faith, your labor prompted by love, and your endurance inspired by hope in our lord jesus christ.
about noon the following day as they were on their journey and approaching the city, peter went up on the roof to pray.
what is more, i consider everything a loss compared to the surpassing greatness of knowing christ jesus my lord, for whose sake i have lost all things. i consider them rubbish, that i may gain christ
ear
“why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother’s eye and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye?
paul acknowledged his [role as] slave to jesus because he had become his servant.
and throw that worthless servant outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
the oath he swore to our father abraham:
sharpening stone, whetstone
a person, if he has something to tell his companion, he will just whisper what he is saying into the ear of his companion whatever it is they are hiding and just [the] two of them know about their agreement.
possible
they were saddened, and one by one they said to him, "surely not i?"
if we have a guest, those in another house hurry over to meet them and find out [about them].
in fact, though by this time you ought to be teachers, you need someone to teach you the elementary truths of god’s word all over again. you need milk, not solid food!
evening, around 5 p.m.
illness
then jesus asked him, "what is your name?"
used for killing fish
if there are children who are eating and there is a lot of rice which falls to the floor, they are wasting the food.
a weight; on a net or fishing line; an anchor.
we know that we live in him and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit.
and i heard a loud voice from the throne saying, “look! god’s dwelling place is now among the people, and he will dwell with them. they will be his people, and god himself will be with them and be their god.
for we are god’s handiwork, created in christ jesus to do good works, which god prepared in advance for us to do.
but i know you. i know that you do not have the love of god in your hearts.
go off in a different direction [
strain
kausing nearly fell
but a samaritan, as he traveled, came where the man was; and when he saw him, he took pity on him.
but when john rebuked herod the tetrarch because of his marriage to herodias, his brother’s wife, and all the other evil things he had done,
scarcely had [someone] spoke
rays
small bamboo water pole used in the rainy season
still others, like seed sown among thorns, hear the word;
poisonous multicolored snake
morally bad
to dance a baby by its hands
to do something heartily
floor ankle length skirt or trousers.
selfish
grandfather amasig heard that i was worried about my saw.
barb, thorn
i rejoiced greatly in the lord that at last you renewed your concern for me. indeed, you were concerned, but you had no opportunity to show it.
for the son of man is going to come in his father’s glory with his angels, and then he will reward each person according to what they have done.
then he got into the boat and his disciples followed him.
shed, as a skin or soft shell.
what if he did this to make the riches of his glory known to the objects of his mercy, whom he prepared in advance for glory—
and now these three remain: faith, hope and love. but the greatest of these is love.
those who sin are to be rebuked publicly, so that the others may take warning.
but the word of god continued to spread and flourish.
to draw near, close together
the lake that is dammed up, has no outlet
predict
but they will have to give account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.
just then a man in their synagogue who was possessed by an evil spirit cried out,
[i've] had it with this child who is always crying who has a hollowed-out mouth!
but rejoice that you participate in the sufferings of christ, so that you may be overjoyed when his glory is revealed.
to dance swinging a piece of material in just one hand
god is just: he will pay back trouble to those who trouble you
gurgling noise of water being poured out of a bamboo water pole
in his humiliation he was deprived of justice. who can speak of his descendants? for his life was taken from the earth.”
jesus answered, "do you think that these galileans were worse sinners than all the other galileans because they suffered this way?
they all ate and were satisfied,
vagina
put the mortar under the house lest it get rained on.
hull
i want you to recall the words spoken in the past by the holy prophets and the command given by our lord and savior through your apostles.
if one trembles, he shivers because he has been entered by his familiar spirit.
to carve a design into wood with a sharp instrument
wood or debris left behind by water
everyone was amazed and gave praise to god. they were filled with awe and said, “we have seen remarkable things today.”
we know that god spoke to moses, but as for this fellow, we don't even know where he comes from."
i vouch for him that he is working hard for you and for those at laodicea and hierapolis.
if there is a side-stream which has been blocked, if a person breaks up the blockage, it has been cleared.
become dirty or contaminated
for three and a half days some from every people, tribe, language and nation will gaze on their bodies and refuse them burial.
the visitors came and found us absent from the house.
whatever medicine is effective [against] an illness, that is strong medicine
it is enough for students to be like their teachers, and servants like their masters. if the head of the house has been called beelzebul, how much more the members of his household!
to ask someone privately.
when a person has become drunk, he will become sober when he wakes up. he will recover; he won't be drunk.
now to the unmarried and the widows i say: it is good for them to stay unmarried, as i do.
always or frequently
if you tie a chicken and it struggles, it will hop away.
“go away! what do you want with us, jesus of nazareth? have you come to destroy us? i know who you are—the holy one of god!”
now, fellow israelites, i know that you acted in ignorance, as did your leaders.
stain
the words of the manobo and of english are opposite. they have been reversed.
if there are those which we-excl join together, [they are] each a small unit, [or] a satallite
our house was protected from the wate
and here is my judgment about what is best for you in this matter. last year you were the first not only to give but also to have the desire to do so.
to cluster around and lean toward each other (huddle)
this rice is lumpy.
the people were amazed at his teaching, because he taught them as one who had authority, not as the teachers of the law.
the people were waiting expectantly and were all wondering in their hearts if john might possibly be the messiah.
the name of the star is wormwood. a third of the waters turned bitter, and many people died from the waters that had become bitter.
but jesus often withdrew to lonely places and prayed.
a fruit to ripen ahead of others such as a banana on a stalk.
let us, then, go to him outside the camp, bearing the disgrace he bore.
to pull out as a tooth.
amazed and perplexed, they asked one another, “what does this mean?”
when a tree sheds its leaves, the leaves drop off when the wind blows against them.
our feet did not touch the cement.
but when they saw him walking on the lake, they thought he was a ghost. they cried out,
remove a thorn by scraping or pressing
he appointed twelve--designating them apostles --that they might be with him and that he might send them out to preach and to have authority to drive out demons.
guard the good deposit that was entrusted to you--guard it with the help of the holy spirit who lives in us.
serve
he replied: "watch out that you are not deceived. for many will come in my name, claiming, 'i am he,' and, 'the time is near.' do not follow them.
"why? what crime has he committed?" asked pilate. but they shouted all the louder, "crucify him!"
show proper respect to everyone: love the brotherhood of believers, fear god, honor the king.
he sent them to bethlehem and said, “go and search carefully for the child. as soon as you find him, report to me, so that i too may go and worship him.”
rattan snare for wild rooster
be greedy
cut me off a piece of cucumber
when we finish eating and stack the dishes, we clear the table of dishes and food.
yet you have a few people in sardis who have not soiled their clothes. they will walk with me, dressed in white, for they are worthy.
let no debt remain outstanding, except the continuing debt to love one another, for whoever loves others has fulfilled the law.
for the man who was miraculously healed was over forty years old.
to release, as trigger of a trap
the person who was cooking, he/she took a potholder which which to remove the lid of the pot because it was hot.
a person who is afflicted with a fear of people is terrified and must travel to wherever he might go.
in this way the word of the lord spread widely and grew in power.
lose all offspring (bad luck for a hen)
dance
scoot forward
to make.
all kinds of animals, birds, reptiles and creatures of the sea are being tamed and have been tamed by man,
meeting of men only.
if someone asks, “what day is tomorrow?” the reason he is asking is because he does not know whether the next day might be monday or wednesday.
so she came running to simon peter and the other disciple, the one jesus loved, and said, “they have taken the lord out of the tomb, and we don’t know where they have put him!”
so jesus called them and spoke to them in parables: "how can satan drive out satan?
that woman is a greedy person; she ate up all the rice and didn't leave any rice for her husband.
the small fishhook will be baited with an earthworm.
the larva of the palasan rattan forms a cocoon by enveloping itself in what it has chewed up, and only then does it change into a beetle.
it was kept a secret from us.
then i heard a loud voice in heaven say: “now have come the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our god, and the authority of his messiah. for the accuser of our brothers and sisters, who accuses them before our god day and night, has been hurled down.
even if i should choose to boast, i would not be a fool, because i would be speaking the truth. but i refrain, so no one will think more of me than is warranted by what i do or say.
reserve or engage
to pursue a wounded animal
remember your leaders, who spoke the word of god to you. consider the outcome of their way of life and imitate their faith.
camote
and you also must testify, for you have been with me from the beginning.
now about food sacrificed to idols: we know that we all possess knowledge. knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
the elder,
now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian.
the pig is the object of concern when someone has died.
the promise is for you and your children and for all who are far off—for all whom the lord our god will call.”
nevertheless, we must run aground on some island."
older sibling or relative
that has come to you. in the same way, the gospel is bearing fruit and growing throughout the whole world—just as it has been doing among you since the day you heard it and truly understood god’s grace.
uncover the rice so it can dry out.
the person who worked at a another location, he received a message from his wife by cell phone [saying], “carry through to return home to kapalong next week.
as for a person who has a cough, the one who has a whooping cough is always coughing because his throat is itching.
i have not stopped giving thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers.
but i was lowered in a basket from a window in the wall and slipped through his hands.
during those days another large crowd gathered. since they had nothing to eat, jesus called his disciples to him and said,
if ten women are weeding their rice, they work together as a group as they weed.
as you are going with your adversary to the magistrate, try hard to be reconciled to him on the way, or he may drag you off to the judge, and the judge turn you over to the officer, and the officer throw you into prison.
a few men became followers of paul and believed. among them was dionysius, a member of the areopagus, also a woman named damaris, and a number of others.
hide
because he loves our nation and has built our synagogue.”
"and now, compelled by the spirit, i am going to jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there.
he also forced everyone, small and great, rich and poor, free and slave, to receive a mark on his right hand or on his forehead,
but you, dear friends, build yourselves up in your most holy faith and pray in the holy spirit.
yes, you have decreased in girth. your waist has become smaller.
if a flower has not yet opened, it is still closed.
the crowd joined in the attack against paul and silas, and the magistrates
invitation to wrestle playfully
some pharisees came and tested him by asking, "is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?"
for he and all his companions were astonished at the catch of fish they had taken,
they spear us up through the floor
even though i was once a blasphemer and a persecutor and a violent man, i was shown mercy because i acted in ignorance and unbelief.
when they arrived, they went upstairs to the room where they were staying. those present were peter, john, james and andrew; philip and thomas, bartholomew and matthew; james son of alphaeus and simon the zealot, and judas son of james.
for this reason i remind you to fan into flame the gift of god, which is in you through the laying on of my hands.
guardian of the house ties
if you have any encouragement from being united with christ, if any comfort from his love, if any fellowship with the spirit, if any tenderness and compassion,
when he had finished praying, jesus left with his disciples and crossed the kidron valley. on the other side there was a garden, and he and his disciples went into it.
we always thank god for all of you and continually mention you in our prayers.
bring together
outlet where a side stream rejoins the main river
shortening
kind of rattan
the person who desires many women, that is a lustful person.
some in the crowd shouted one thing and some another, and since the commander could not get at the truth because of the uproar, he ordered that paul be taken into the barracks.
left
when he arrived at the house of jairus, he did not let anyone go in with him except peter, john and james, and the child’s father and mother.
listen then to what the parable of the sower means:
when they heard this, they raised their voices together in prayer to god. “sovereign lord,” they said, “you made the heavens and the earth and the sea, and everything in them.
be wiped out
his/her emotions are easily upset.
and as for you, brothers and sisters, never tire of doing what is good.
possibly
but the word of the lord stands forever." and this is the word that was preached to you.
jesus has been found worthy of greater honor than moses, just as the builder of a house has greater honor than the house itself.
to be seemingly unconcerned
that
make a walking stick of that tree.
all you need to say is simply ‘yes’ or ‘no’; anything beyond this comes from the evil one.
to easily become frustrated
time of year to start a new field (march)
feel sorry for
“watch and pray so that you will not fall into temptation. the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.”
hold back
to saw such as for sawing wood
bamboo stick
older women as mothers, and younger women as sisters, with absolute purity.
heaven and earth adjacent to each other.
penetrate
and you also must testify, for you have been with me from the beginning.
the disciples asked him, “why then do the teachers of the law say that elijah must come first?”
“this is the moses who told the israelites, ‘god will raise up for you a prophet like me from your own people.’
they were seared by the intense heat and they cursed the name of god, who had control over these plagues, but they refused to repent and glorify him.
take hold of and push
hold or carry
measure each other
in the same way the men also abandoned natural relations with women and were inflamed with lust for one another. men committed shameful acts with other men, and received in themselves the due penalty for their error.
hit the chicken on the head with a death blow.
but our citizenship is in heaven. and we eagerly await a savior from there, the lord jesus christ,
i, however, avoid scandals because they make trouble. we shouldn't get involved in scandals about other people.
“i’m going out to fish,” simon peter told them, and they said, “we’ll go with you.” so they went out and got into the boat, but that night they caught nothing.
i
lack
only one member of a pair of objects
epaphras, my fellow prisoner in christ jesus, sends you greetings.
move forward
as for filipinos, it is their custom to noisily slurp their soup.
envy
they will treat you this way because of my name, for they do not know the one who sent me.
mix
be slow to carry out an activity or fulfill a request
pull
a kind of bird
they traveled through the whole island until they came to paphos. there they met a jewish sorcerer and false prophet named bar-jesus,
but the counselor, the holy spirit, whom the father will send in my name, will teach you all things and will remind you of everything i have said to you.
hawk or hawk-eagle
deacons, likewise, are to be men worthy of respect, sincere, not indulging in much wine, and not pursuing dishonest gain.
i tell you the truth, anyone who gives you a cup of water in my name because you belong to christ will certainly not lose his reward.
there will be trouble and distress for every human being who does evil: first for the jew, then for the gentile;
we strain out the debris which was in the basin. it is the debris in the water which is strained out
mute
as for that being frustrated, she was definitely not at peace.
to address a little girl
so i made up my mind that i would not make another painful visit to you.
we also know that the law is made not for the righteous but for lawbreakers and rebels, the ungodly and sinful, the unholy and irreligious, for those who kill their fathers or mothers, for murderers,
pelvic bone
"and when i broke the seven loaves for the four thousand, how many basketfuls of pieces did you pick up?" they answered, "seven."
for false messiahs and false prophets will appear and perform great signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, even the elect.
then john gave this testimony: “i saw the spirit come down from heaven as a dove and remain on him.
in the morning, as they went along, they saw the fig tree withered from the roots.
axe
to possess, or own, something
and brought back his head on a platter. he presented it to the girl, and she gave it to her mother.
for we know in part and we prophesy in part,
then go quickly and tell his disciples: ‘he has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into galilee. there you will see him.’ now i have told you.”
you see, at just the right time, when we were still powerless, christ died for the ungodly.
fish trap made of bamboo
but barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles. he told them how saul on his journey had seen the lord and that the lord had spoken to him, and how in damascus he had preached fearlessly in the name of jesus.
he replied, “every plant that my heavenly father has not planted will be pulled up by the roots.
then what was said through the prophet jeremiah was fulfilled:
kind of tree fruit, eaten by rats,
but paul and barnabas remained in antioch, where they and many others taught and preached the word of the lord.
as for my daughter jeany who fell from a santol tree, she involuntarily cried out because the throbbing pain hurt excessively.
a kind of leaf that grows from the ground
being fully persuaded that god had power to do what he had promised.
to open one's eyes
trigger
which said: “write on a scroll what you see and send it to the seven churches: to ephesus, smyrna, pergamum, thyatira, sardis, philadelphia and laodicea.”
greet all the saints in christ jesus. the brothers who are with me send greetings.
when they came to the border of mysia, they tried to enter bithynia, but the spirit of jesus would not allow them to.
still other seed fell on good soil. it came up and yielded a crop, a hundred times more than was sown.” when he said this, he called out, “whoever has ears to hear, let them hear.”
it could have been sold for more than a year's wages and the money given to the poor." and they rebuked her harshly.
by faith the people passed through the red sea as on dry land; but when the egyptians tried to do so, they were drowned.
that's why we will increase [the amount of] my money so that it will be enough to arrive at maambago.
endure hardship with us like a good soldier of christ jesus.
for we are to god the aroma of christ among those who are being saved and those who are perishing
expand as a flower; widen as an opening, enlarge, spread, burst forth as sunshine
to spread (like paste)
type of tree used to treat rice against bugs
we are expect that the plane [may come] tomorrow
lift up one’s head
we have much to say about this, but it is hard to make it clear to you because you no longer try to understand.
in lystra there sat a man who was lame. he had been that way from birth and had never walked.
he sent another servant, but that one also they beat and treated shamefully and sent away empty-handed.
pass through, as water leaking through a pot
thick
the chief priests and the teachers of the law heard this and began looking for a way to kill him, for they feared him, because the whole crowd was amazed at his teaching.
"caesar's," they replied. he said to them, "then give to caesar what is caesar's, and to god what is god's."
aware that his disciples were grumbling about this, jesus said to them, "does this offend you?
be told
acknowledge
the hearth frame was burned.
then they understood that he was not telling them to guard against the yeast used in bread, but against the teaching of the pharisees and sadducees.
other seed fell among thorns, which grew up with it and choked the plants.
and because he was a tentmaker as they were, he stayed and worked with them.
do not conform to the pattern of this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind. then you will be able to test and approve what god’s will is—his good, pleasing and perfect will.
the king will reply, ‘truly i tell you, whatever you did for one of the least of these brothers and sisters of mine, you did for me.’
they looked for a way to arrest him, but they were afraid of the crowd because the people held that he was a prophet.
not that we lord it over your faith, but we work with you for your joy, because it is by faith you stand firm.
an impression, mark, bruise or raised area such as is made by pressure against some object or a result of a blow.
to stride, take long steps
if someone who promotes peace is there, your peace will rest on them; if not, it will return to you.
a metal band reinforcing a bolo handle or spear shaft
anyone who runs ahead and does not continue in the teaching of christ does not have god; whoever continues in the teaching has both the father and the son.
every day he was teaching at the temple. but the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the leaders among the people were trying to kill him.
there was someone who obtained a lot of small fish which she caught in her fish trap.
when the centurion and those with him who were guarding jesus saw the earthquake and all that had happened, they were terrified, and exclaimed, “surely he was the son of god!”
kind of mold
humble yourselves before the lord, and he will lift you up.
the guards were so afraid of him that they shook and became like dead men.
when the lamb opened the fourth seal, i heard the voice of the fourth living creature say, “come!”
since you died with christ to the basic principles of this world, why, as though you still belonged to it, do you submit to its rules:
to be called on by a dove (bad omen)
come
middle, or center
to intercept.
nevertheless, i have a few things against you: you have people there who hold to the teaching of balaam, who taught balak to entice the israelites to sin by eating food sacrificed to idols and by committing sexual immorality.
greet philologus, julia, nereus and his sister, and olympas and all the saints with them.
my companions saw the light, but they did not understand the voice of him who was speaking to me.
fearful,
never mind, go ahead.
when he came to jerusalem, he tried to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he really was a disciple.
paul replied, “brothers, i did not realize that he was the high priest; for it is written: ‘do not speak evil about the ruler of your people.’”
someone saw honey bees and he pointed them out to his companion.
wood that is quick-burning always flames and then quickly burns up when used to build a fire.
sigh from weariness
you will not be able to take the horse unless you have an agreement as to when you will pay for it in full.
exhortation
coming over to us, he took paul’s belt, tied his own hands and feet with it and said, “the holy spirit says, ‘in this way the jewish leaders in jerusalem will bind the owner of this belt and will hand him over to the gentiles.’”
the fin by the fish's ear is what determines the movement of the body of that fish.
so the servants went out into the streets and gathered all the people they could find, the bad as well as the good, and the wedding hall was filled with guests.
sloping
when the water has cooled off, we will drink it.
because of your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now,
to hire someone to take harvest downriver
if anybody thinks he is a prophet or spiritually gifted, let him acknowledge that what i am writing to you is the lord's command.
lay something parallel to something else.
if a child gets sick who is always bathing [in the river], the older people say that he afflicted by an evil spirit because he affected by a long-haired spirit [which lives in the water].
angry.
as for flour, if we shake the sack of flour, it will become dust because it becomes airborne.
fuzzy, wooly (blanket, tree, plant); hairy animal
if a person has a concern and then his breath is helped, his brow relaxes.
to rescue us from the hand of our enemies, and to enable us to serve him without fear
murder
when he had gone a little farther, he saw james son of zebedee and his brother john in a boat, preparing their nets.
“their throats are open graves; their tongues practice deceit.” “the poison of vipers is on their lips.”
the betelnut is lacking.
cornfield
for he says, “in the time of my favor i heard you, and in the day of salvation i helped you.” i tell you, now is the time of god’s favor, now is the day of salvation.
“on that day you will realize that i am in my father, and you are in me, and i am in you.”
jesus answered, "the work of god is this: to believe in the one he has sent."
convinced of this, i know that i will remain, and i will continue with all of you for your progress and joy in the faith,
he saw heaven opened and something like a large sheet being let down to earth by its four corners.
“the jewish people all know the way i have lived ever since i was a child, from the beginning of my life in my own country, and also in jerusalem.
you take heed when you are corrected.
and whoever wants to be first must be slave of all.
to become dismantled or come apart
a warning
then those also who have fallen asleep in christ are lost.
and now you will be silent and not able to speak until the day this happens, because you did not believe my words, which will come true at their appointed time.”
later, later on; but then; to turn out differently than expected.
as for people who swim underwater, [they] hold their breath as they swim underwater looking for fish.
a proper or common name; to name something or call it by a term.
to pass the long way around, detour
core of wood or raw camotes
accuse falsely; to express one's assumption that someone to be guilty without evidence.
“who touched me?” jesus asked. when they all denied it, peter said, “master, the people are crowding and pressing against you.”
when they heard [that], they said, “stand still. there is something moaning.”
have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness, but rather expose them.
the sesame [stems] are turned upside down to let the seeds drop out because the seeds have burst open.
feel
flee
that is, the mystery made known to me by revelation, as i have already written briefly.
woe to you, teachers of the law and pharisees, you hypocrites! you give a tenth of your spices—mint, dill and cumin. but you have neglected the more important matters of the law—justice, mercy and faithfulness. you should have practiced the latter, without neglecting the former.
save
therefore, since we are receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us be thankful, and so worship god acceptably with reverence and awe,
he went on to tell the people this parable: "a man planted a vineyard, rented it to some farmers and went away for a long time
to flex; a body joint.
to stick to a job
from now on there will be five in one family divided against each other, three against two and two against three.
having tiny holes or leaks
then he turned toward the woman and said to simon, “do you see this woman? i came into your house. you did not give me any water for my feet, but she wet my feet with her tears and wiped them with her hair.
that each of you should learn to control your own body in a way that is holy and honorable,
may he strengthen your hearts so that you will be blameless and holy in the presence of our god and father when our lord jesus comes with all his holy ones.
a single turn is just one curve.
field used for rice, then camotes, then left idle
sold a field he owned and brought the money and put it at the apostles’ feet.
spin or whirl fast as a propellor
for while we are in this tent, we groan and are burdened, because we do not wish to be unclothed but to be clothed with our heavenly dwelling, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
and if a revelation comes to someone who is sitting down, the first speaker should stop.
the horse, when it gave birth, a colt was born.
submit yourselves for the lord's sake to every authority instituted among men: whether to the king, as the supreme authority,
but what does it matter? the important thing is that in every way, whether from false motives or true, christ is preached. and because of this i rejoice.
travel directly to one’s destination without delay
"be quiet!" said jesus sternly. "come out of him!"
you need to persevere so that when you have done the will of god, you will receive what he has promised.
then one of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels seven golden bowls filled with the wrath of god, who lives for ever and ever.
the imbabasuk spirit is the one who gives a big harvest. that is the one who does magic.
a person who is cheerful is quick to laugh if he/she sees his/her companion(s). it's like he/she has no worries.
refuse
in the same way, on the outside you appear to people as righteous but on the inside you are full of hypocrisy and wickedness.
the week which will follow has already begun.
in them is fulfilled the prophecy of isaiah: ‘you will be ever hearing but never understanding; you will be ever seeing but never perceiving.
bow, or forepart, of a boat
when they are wriggling, your intestines are always moving about because they (lit. it) doesn’t have anything inside.
the dog's fur dropped out.
entrust
filmy skin covering corn, beans, eggs, or organs
there were some who came to meet us when we arrived at another place.
just one betelnut on a palm tree.
did centinales leave real early in the morning?
ugalinga is their adoptive mother and her husband is their adoptive father.
to become unraveled
cough
to vow
widower
to converse
put out of joint
to be slanted or leaning
this can refer to the supreme god or be used of beings which are believed to be gods.
so i will very gladly spend for you everything i have and expend myself as well. if i love you more, will you love me less?
garlic
there a centurion’s servant, whom his master valued highly, was sick and about to die.
what i say to you, i say to everyone: 'watch!' "
kind of bird, dark feathers on back and light-colored breast
i have much to write to you, but i do not want to use paper and ink. instead, i hope to visit you and talk with you face to face, so that our joy may be complete.
roast in fire
kneel, as before a shaman for healing
if a person walks and stomps, his steps are loud and we are awakened.
jerk, as when startled
to take/bring something across (river) to someone else
the person said, “don't continue because there is no rice in patil because it has been consumed.
to go through the motions of waving a chicken before sacrificing it.
when jim took our picture and when it was finished, he gave us our picture.
he said to the crowd: "when you see a cloud rising in the west, immediately you say, 'it's going to rain,' and it does.
there was no coconut to be added.
a sleeping mat.
we are relying on alikas
talkative (friendly and outgoing)
tail
when the sawog fish comes next to us, it comes into our clear view.
“while i was with them, i protected them and kept them safe by that name you gave me. none has been lost except the one doomed to destruction so that scripture would be fulfilled.”
now peter was sitting out in the courtyard, and a servant girl came to him. “you also were with jesus of galilee,” she said.
therefore anyone who sets aside one of the least of these commands and teaches others accordingly will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever practices and teaches these commands will be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
they have made a commitment [to each other] because their feelings (lit. breath) were the same. they have come to an agreement with each other. they desire each other. the attraction of the two [of them] is mutual.
milk
like newborn babies, crave pure spiritual milk, so that by it you may grow up in your salvation,
after this, jesus and his disciples went out into the judean countryside, where he spent some time with them, and baptized.
you know what has happened throughout the province of judea, beginning in galilee after the baptism that john preached—
in the days of abiathar the high priest, he entered the house of god and ate the consecrated bread, which is lawful only for priests to eat. and he also gave some to his companions."
correct fit
chickenpox.
even though
to be surprised, amazed, horrified
so he ordered that they be baptized in the name of jesus christ. then they asked peter to stay with them for a few days.
armed warriors
the grace of our lord was poured out on me abundantly, along with the faith and love that are in christ jesus.
for the spine to protrude
“teacher,” they said, “moses told us that if a man dies without having children, his brother must marry the widow and raise up offspring for him.
tirino said, “those who don't feel unsafe, don't leave kapugi. if [you] feel unsafe, leave together now for maambao because there are warning of raiders for a while.”
and they sang a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders. no one could learn the song except the 144,000 who had been redeemed from the earth.
look at my hands and my feet. it is i myself! touch me and see; a ghost does not have flesh and bones, as you see i have."
if we get a thorn in our foot, we will pick it out with a needle so that it will be removed.
bite by snapping
they are also seven kings. five have fallen, one is, the other has not yet come; but when he does come, he must remain for only a little while.
we did this, not because we do not have the right to such help, but in order to offer ourselves as a model for you to imitate.
why did you falsely accuse me of doing something when i certainly did not do something wrong.
put [your tobacco] behind your ear.
toothless
to be repaired or to have been repaired
greet ampliatus, my dear friend in the lord.
let no one on the roof of his house go down or enter the house to take anything out.
but in the account of the bush, even moses showed that the dead rise, for he calls the lord 'the god of abraham, and the god of isaac, and the god of jacob.'
after john was put in prison, jesus went into galilee, proclaiming the good news of god.
pray also for me, that whenever i open my mouth, words may be given me so that i will fearlessly make known the mystery of the gospel,
to reciprocate in work
moses writes this about the righteousness that is by the law: “the person who does these things will live by them.”
to search for.
completely burn a field
for many to approach someone
for the creation was subjected to frustration, not by its own choice, but by the will of the one who subjected it, in hope
abcesses
firm
we harvest young corn because we will boil it since it is good to eat.
those who belong to christ jesus have crucified the sinful nature with its passions and desires.
to write
they have made a commitment  [to each other] because their affections are the same. they have come to agreement with each other. they desire each other. the attraction between the two of them is mutual.
to act in a certain way
and said, ‘cornelius, god has heard your prayer and remembered your gifts to the poor.
a small black and white spotted  electric eel
when he came back, he again found them sleeping, because their eyes were heavy. they did not know what to say to him.
you made that effort for nothing  because you weren’t able to get any cloth.
add on
noise
the flesh and bones of the tail of animals or reptiles.
the person commands the evil spirit.
in any case, i must keep going today and tomorrow and the next day--for surely no prophet can die outside jerusalem!
kind of bird similar to a robin but walks on the ground
you’ve been affected by manogò.
shoes
but with good deeds, appropriate for women who profess to worship god.
now
but land that produces thorns and thistles is worthless and is in danger of being cursed. in the end it will be burned.
peace and mercy to all who follow this rule, even to the israel of god.
they kept asking, “what does he mean by ‘a little while’? we don’t understand what he is saying.”
rise! let us go! here comes my betrayer!"
this is how my heavenly father will treat each of you unless you forgive your brother or sister from your heart.”
so judas threw the money into the temple and left. then he went away and hanged himself.
if you acknowledge me as your companion, you also have acknowleged unisimu. the response to this is, “why shouldn't we acknowledge [him] when [he] is also our companion?”
to trigger off
frying pan
papyrus
"you heard me say, 'i am going away and i am coming back to you.' if you loved me, you would be glad that i am going to the father, for the father is greater than i.
wrist
grab
and so jesus also suffered outside the city gate to make the people holy through his own blood.
deliver a portion of fish or game to each house
in the past god spoke to our ancestors through the prophets at many times and in various ways,
dropped
she had a sister called mary, who sat at the lord’s feet listening to what he said.
"what shall i do, then, with the one you call the king of the jews?" pilate asked them.
the paper will tear raggedly.
in fact, though by this time you ought to be teachers, you need someone to teach you the elementary truths of god’s word all over again. you need milk, not solid food!
therefore everyone who hears these words of mine and puts them into practice is like a wise man who built his house on the rock.
a black shrimp.
are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? do all work miracles?
attend spirit ceremony
the women who had come with jesus from galilee followed joseph and saw the tomb and how his body was laid in it.
consider therefore the kindness and sternness of god: sternness to those who fell, but kindness to you, provided that you continue in his kindness. otherwise, you also will be cut off.
for god said, ‘honor your father and mother’ and ‘anyone who curses their father or mother must be put to death.’
compete
god made him who had no sin to be sin for us, so that in him we might become the righteousness of god.
yours
inside
give to everyone who asks you, and if anyone takes what belongs to you, do not demand it back.
or these who are here should state what crime they found in me when i stood before the sanhedrin--
die in childbirth.
he will trade a pig for that one.
the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you.
carried away
forgive
you will be told when [the grains] have filled out.
to the one we are the smell of death; to the other, the fragrance of life. and who is equal to such a task?
meander, circle
but if you are led by the spirit, you are not under law.
news about him spread quickly over the whole region of galilee.
bloated stomach
fall or slide downhill
about noon the following day as they were on their journey and approaching the city, peter went up on the roof to pray.
the man who eats everything must not look down on him who does not, and the man who does not eat everything must not condemn the man who does, for god has accepted him.
"i am not possessed by a demon," said jesus, "but i honor my father and you dishonor me.
"when i returned to jerusalem and was praying at the temple, i fell into a trance
when the devil had finished all this tempting, he left him until an opportune time.
as soon as they got out of the boat, people recognized jesus.
kind of pattern of a carved comb made of bamboo.
the brothers at lystra and iconium spoke well of him.
kind of tree with red wood and bark
the kalayag spirit will punish.
we will ask what the source of the argument was.
hole up (as in a stronghold)
wiggle one’s scalp.
turn on one's side, edge
this is the first and greatest commandment.
we beat with one drumstick on a [hanging] gong, and we beat a rhythm on a drum.
for he was looking forward to the city with foundations, whose architect and builder is god.
remember those in prison as if you were their fellow prisoners, and those who are mistreated as if you yourselves were suffering.
after the crowd had been put outside, he went in and took the girl by the hand, and she got up.
many of the jews read this sign, for the place where jesus was crucified was near the city, and the sign was written in aramaic, latin and greek.
for the word of god is alive and active. sharper than any double-edged sword, it penetrates even to dividing soul and spirit, joints and marrow; it judges the thoughts and attitudes of the heart.
a person whose eye gets something in it cannot open his eye.
then from his mouth the serpent spewed water like a river, to overtake the woman and sweep her away with the torrent.
kick
the person who dove, he happened to bump his head against the rock in the water and his forehead was abrazed and he was injured badly.
to pay immediately upon request
i cause my back to bend backwards when i lean back and over against something because my back hurts.
bend, as a needle
even though my illness was a trial to you, you did not treat me with contempt or scorn. instead, you welcomed me as if i were an angel of god, as if i were christ jesus himself.
dance the baby.
on a sabbath jesus was teaching in one of the synagogues,
blood
a banana which is cooked which is called allaba. granaba is the visayan name.
whoever tries to keep their life will lose it, and whoever loses their life will preserve it.
lizard with large high spines on the back
on hearing this, jesus said, “it is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick.
the flavor is different.
therefore, anyone who swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it.
a channel, groove, or ditch.
suppose
“but to you who are listening i say: love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
i pray that you may be active in sharing your faith, so that you will have a full understanding of every good thing we have in christ.
upriver
who gave himself as a ransom for all people. this has now been witnessed to at the proper time.
squeeze a fistful of something
they still did not believe that he had been blind and had received his sight until they sent for the man’s parents.
deaf
short
i have come into the world as a light, so that no one who believes in me should stay in darkness.
to become black
plop down, as a weak child or dizzy adult
even if it is high or if it is short, thick or thin and surrounds a house or the yard, it is called an alad fense.
then the father realized that this was the exact time at which jesus had said to him, “your son will live.” so he and his whole household believed.
“where is this man?” they asked him. “i don’t know,” he said.
those in sulit, langilan, banuwaloy, kapugi, and pipisan, that is the word they use.
if one part suffers, every part suffers with it; if one part is honored, every part rejoices with it.
abrade
now while he was in jerusalem at the passover festival, many people saw the signs he was performing and believed in his name.
that everyone who believes may have eternal life in him.”
to hate, to be angry to such an extent as to become an enemy
how shall we escape if we ignore such a great salvation? this salvation, which was first announced by the lord, was confirmed to us by those who heard him.
red mites
when we were drawn to god, our love (lit. breath) for god was increased. he alone was the one who drew us [to himself].
she involuntarily cried out because the throbbing pain hurt excessively as her body was smashed.
“then, lord,” simon peter replied, “not just my feet but my hands and my head as well!”
jesus looked at him and loved him. "one thing you lack," he said. "go, sell everything you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. then come, follow me."
the child who is slow to finish what he was given to eat, he is hoarding his food.
very much
type of exchange (barter or purchase)
jesus stopped and called them. “what do you want me to do for you?” he asked.
the reason for something
the person who is making a house, he works hard to finish making it because he will move in.
go rather to the lost sheep of israel.
do not believe me unless i do what my father does.
some of his disciples were remarking about how the temple was adorned with beautiful stones and with gifts dedicated to god. but jesus said,
immerse in water
he trusts in god. let god rescue him now if he wants him, for he said, ‘i am the son of god.’”
we know that god spoke to moses, but as for this fellow, we don't even know where he comes from."
we made slow headway for many days and had difficulty arriving off cnidus. when the wind did not allow us to hold our course, we sailed to the lee of crete, opposite salmone.
to pay up front
nickname
to rot from water
they brought to the pharisees the man who had been blind.
having lost all sensitivity, they have given themselves over to sensuality so as to indulge in every kind of impurity, with a continual lust for more.
after three days they found him in the temple courts, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking them questions.
god can testify how i long for all of you with the affection of christ jesus.
an impression, mark, bruise or raised area such as is made by pressure against some object or a result of a blow.
for the husband is the head of the wife as christ is the head of the church, his body, of which he is the savior.
after a little while, those standing there went up to peter and said, “surely you are one of them; your accent gives you away.”
after three months we put out to sea in a ship that had wintered in the island. it was an alexandrian ship with the figurehead of the twin gods castor and pollux.
while jesus was teaching in the temple courts, he asked, "how is it that the teachers of the law say that the christ is the son of david?
when the pig has been cooked, they strip the meat from the bone which still has meat; they cut off every bit of meat from the bone until bone is all that is left.
finally the temple guards went back to the chief priests and pharisees, who asked them, "why didn't you bring him in?"
when we pound rice, we strike it with the end of the pestle.
his brother-in-law keeps a store.
lose one’s baby teeth
canoe.
if you are worried about something, you will be disturbed if somone asks you
to be full or satiated (from food)
the chief priests and the whole sanhedrin were looking for false evidence against jesus so that they could put him to death.
if the wild pig is here in the middle, the people will surround it as they come out of hiding to attack it.
to be slim
meaning
your intestines continually wiggle when it is empty
name of a tree which has long, smooth leaves; also the name of a creek and a village
harvested but unthreshed rice stored in granary
if you then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your father in heaven give the holy spirit to those who ask him!"
if this report gets to the governor, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble.”
give the dove some camote
“no,” said peter, “you shall never wash my feet.” jesus answered, “unless i wash you, you have no part with me.”
to take food (possible translation issue)
you see that his faith and his actions were working together, and his faith was made complete by what he did.
and, “in the very place where it was said to them, ‘you are not my people,’ there they will be called ‘children of the living god.’”
jesus called them together and said, "you know that those who are regarded as rulers of the gentiles lord it over them, and their high officials exercise authority over them.
jacob’s well was there, and jesus, tired as he was from the journey, sat down by the well. it was about noon.
that which we would have done at the beginning was supplanted and so then we were distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish what we started out to do.
be numb
from then on judas watched for an opportunity to hand him over.
they said to him, "john's disciples often fast and pray, and so do the disciples of the pharisees, but yours go on eating and drinking."
rattan
fall out
pestle with a carved top
and do not call anyone on earth ‘father,’ for you have one father, and he is in heaven.
feathery hair of bamboo
kind of red rice
weight down
piglet with black, white, reddish stripes (lost when older)
and he then begins to beat his fellow servants and to eat and drink with drunkards.
and everyone who speaks a word against the son of man will be forgiven, but anyone who blasphemes against the holy spirit will not be forgiven.
they promise them freedom, while they themselves are slaves of depravity- -for a man is a slave to whatever has mastered him.
when he saw that this met with approval among the jews, he proceeded to seize peter also. this happened during the festival of unleavened bread.
for you know what instructions we gave you by the authority of the lord jesus.
the other disciples followed in the boat, towing the net full of fish, for they were not far from shore, about a hundred yards.
explode
an ata manobo term for the cross-like symbol also called a kinurus.
your
"am i a jew?" pilate replied. "it was your people and your chief priests who handed you over to me. what is it you have done?"
we will haul it downriver.
when the raft passed through the shallow [water], the rattan which was used for holding it together was chewed off and severed by the stones.
they have been informed that you teach all the jews who live among the gentiles to turn away from moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or live according to our customs.
younger (adjective)
therefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices; my body also will rest in hope,
“woe to you, chorazin! woe to you, bethsaida! for if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in tyre and sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
“but when he, the spirit of truth, comes, he will guide you into all the truth. he will not speak on his own; he will speak only what he hears, and he will tell you what is yet to come.”
boy
knee
he went to him and bandaged his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. then he put the man on his own donkey, brought him to an inn and took care of him.
to look around for another husband, flirt while married
smile
a tightly woven tapered backpack
to inadvertently exposed to smoke
sound of plucked instruments
new moon phase.
feel
what shall we say, then? shall we go on sinning so that grace may increase?
give something for free
male piglet
in our place, there are strong winds which are carried by whirlwinds which are able to blow off a roof.
paul and timothy, servants of christ jesus, to all the saints in christ jesus at philippi, together with the overseers and deacons:
white-headed when all hairs have turned grey
dry something in the sun
to bridle and hold tightly
but the centurion wanted to spare paul's life and kept them from carrying out their plan. he ordered those who could swim to jump overboard first and get to land.
the lambus is used to stop the rain.
he asked her, “woman, why are you crying? who is it you are looking for?” thinking he was the gardener, she said, “sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him, and i will get him.”
when jesus heard this, he was amazed at him, and turning to the crowd following him, he said, “i tell you, i have not found such great faith even in israel.”
we also know that the law is made not for the righteous but for lawbreakers and rebels, the ungodly and sinful, the unholy and irreligious, for those who kill their fathers or mothers, for murderers,
older-younger sibling relationship
when they were in the house again, the disciples asked jesus about this.
the next day paul took the men and purified himself along with them. then he went to the temple to give notice of the date when the days of purification would end and the offering would be made for each of them.
then satan entered judas, called iscariot, one of the twelve.
spy
start plucking!
have you not discriminated among yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts?
"but we have no right to execute anyone," the jews objected. this happened so that the words jesus had spoken indicating the kind of death he was going to die would be fulfilled.
accompany or deliver something partway
imitate
but they will not get very far because, as in the case of those men, their folly will be clear to everyone.
edible lizard
as for the  lazy person, he does not want to work.  [as for] the person who is exceedingly lazy, we cannot order him [to do anything].
to be cursed
every day i was with you in the temple courts, and you did not lay a hand on me. but this is your hour--when darkness reigns."
he asked this only to test him, for he already had in mind what he was going to do.
a kind of wild chicken.
do not treat prophecies with contempt
jesus said to the servants, “fill the jars with water”; so they filled them to the brim.
turn up the volume (lit. operation of) the radio.
if someone arrives at someone's house who is hungry, he is given something to eat from the leftovers to temporarily satiate his hunger. then the host/hostess cooks again that which he/she will feed their guests.
let him who does wrong continue to do wrong; let him who is vile continue to be vile; let him who does right continue to do right; and let him who is holy continue to be holy."
then one of the synagogue rulers, named jairus, came there. seeing jesus, he fell at his feet
therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers.
flower pot
swelling
those who were standing near paul said, “how dare you insult god’s high priest!”
brother-in-law was tossing and turning and twisting because his pain which he started experiencing yesterday was excessive.
garlic
come over to meet someone
the ashes will become dust if they blow/are carried by the wind.
someone places a noose beside the nest of a dove. then he shooed the dove and then the neck of the dove was caught in the noose because the noose tightened around its neck.
my fellow prisoner aristarchus sends you his greetings, as does mark, the cousin of barnabas. (you have received instructions about him; if he comes to you, welcome him.)
be intensely thirsty
turning around, jesus saw them following and asked, “what do you want?” they said, “rabbi” (which means “teacher”), “where are you staying?”
they will throw dust on their heads, and with weeping and mourning cry out: " 'woe! woe, o great city, where all who had ships on the sea became rich through her wealth! in one hour she has been brought to ruin!
backbite
many people spread their cloaks on the road, while others spread branches they had cut in the fields.
pluck with a pick or finger
dried salted fish
type of monkey trap with loops
the matchbox, its body was fitted together.
so he took him to the commander. the centurion said, "paul, the prisoner, sent for me and asked me to bring this young man to you because he has something to tell you."
get out of the way; step to the side of the path so a horse or person may go by.
the sap of the dugu-an tree stains
or do you think scripture says without reason that the spirit he caused to live in us envies intensely?
to make into lime
hen gathering her chicks under her wings
half
our people must learn to devote themselves to doing what is good, in order that they may provide for daily necessities and not live unproductive lives.
to try to obtain pigs, horses, or chickens (men only)
when we finish eating and stack the dishes, we clear the table of dishes and food.
too big
this is good, and pleases god our savior,
in fact, the law requires that nearly everything be cleansed with blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness.
we jump up and down when we ump repeatedly two or three times.
a kind of weed with a long tap root, thorny leaves, and vine-like branches.
mercy, peace and love be yours in abundance.
“what should we do then?” the crowd asked.
superlative particle; most, very much, especially.
“truly i tell you, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the kingdom of god.”
it’s bad luck to have a dog that won’t hunt.
pilate then went back inside the palace, summoned jesus and asked him, "are you the king of the jews?"
yet he did not waver through unbelief regarding the promise of god, but was strengthened in his faith and gave glory to god,
short-legged
because when we are clothed, we will not be found naked.
"then you will say, 'we ate and drank with you, and you taught in our streets.'
a [unit] used in counting
[some manuscripts include: but silas decided to remain there.]
they’ll make her nervous if they’re noisy.
that's how big it is.
and again, when god brings his firstborn into the world, he says, “let all god’s angels worship him.”
from that time on jesus began to preach, “repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.”
" 'lord,' i replied, 'these men know that i went from one synagogue to another to imprison and beat those who believe in you.
your intention is bad.
you foolish galatians! who has bewitched you? before your very eyes jesus christ was clearly portrayed as crucified.
pray continually,
he took peter and the two sons of zebedee along with him, and he began to be sorrowful and troubled.
simon has described to us how god first intervened to choose a people for his name from the gentiles.
and their sight was restored. jesus warned them sternly, “see that no one knows about this.”
and in the morning, ‘today it will be stormy, for the sky is red and overcast.’ you know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but you cannot interpret the signs of the times.
a kind of scraper for smoothing wood or bamboo.
plant corn
the son of melki, the son of addi, the son of cosam, the son of elmadam, the son of er,
but the crowds learned about it and followed him. he welcomed them and spoke to them about the kingdom of god, and healed those who needed healing.
the person who is still tentatively planning, he is still merely thinking about making a field where there is a mature secondary forest.
he also said, "this is what the kingdom of god is like. a man scatters seed on the ground.
but you know that timothy has proved himself, because as a son with his father he has served with me in the work of the gospel.
then the woman, seeing that she could not go unnoticed, came trembling and fell at his feet. in the presence of all the people, she told why she had touched him and how she had been instantly healed.
startle someone
it is fine to be zealous, provided the purpose is good, and to be so always, not just when i am with you.
then jesus told them, "you are going to have the light just a little while longer. walk while you have the light, before darkness overtakes you. the man who walks in the dark does not know where he is going.
beat or whip repeatedly
my brothers, some from chloe's household have informed me that there are quarrels among you.
we won’t let the hen develop her eggs.
after he had spent everything, there was a severe famine in that whole country, and he began to be in need.
as for that love charm, it is worn as an armband on the arm or worn as a necklace.
greet andronicus and junia, my fellow jews who have been in prison with me. they are outstanding among the apostles, and they were in christ before i was.
when a samaritan woman came to draw water, jesus said to her, “will you give me a drink?”  (his disciples had gone into the town to buy food.)
ghost
apusow shoots
when it was suppertime already, he happened to think about his family and [wondered] what they might have to eat this afternoon.
jesus knew that the father had put all things under his power, and that he had come from god and was returning to god;
i am here beside you; i am here.
when jesus came to the region of caesarea philippi, he asked his disciples, “who do people say the son of man is?”
to fulfill
when elena worked as a housegirl in davao, she was given instructions to pour water on the flowers.
to plant by sticking plants upright (bananas or taro)
to the married i give this command (not i, but the lord): a wife must not separate from her husband.
a person who is uncouth acts inappropriately is what a person is called who doesn’t have [good] manners.  he just chatters [things] which arent good.
stumble over
when we go on an errand to the forest and there is no water nearby, we cut a vine and pour its water out and drink it because we are thirsty.
the lovers are moving close to each other.
if we’re young, they take advantage of us and give us just a little bit.
cornerpost of the house.
if you keep on biting and devouring each other, watch out or you will be destroyed by each other.
drown; be overwhelmed (as by problems)
to behave
i looked, and there before me was a white cloud, and seated on the cloud was one like a son of man with a crown of gold on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
but they will not get very far because, as in the case of those men, their folly will be clear to everyone.
gums (of a person)
to be lifted off (by wind)
to spear, stab or cut in the same place
anuay is daddy’s stepchild.
this took place to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet:
for the meaning of something to be clear
for in him we live and move and have our being.' as some of your own poets have said, 'we are his offspring.'
to make notches.
mouth
and his affection for you is all the greater when he remembers that you were all obedient, receiving him with fear and trembling.
in the same way the chief priests and the teachers of the law mocked him among themselves. "he saved others," they said, "but he can't save himself!
abundant foods.
to withdraw to eat something alone
two rebels were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left.
winnowing tray
if one is ill and the fever is excessive, his mouth clamps together.
with a mighty voice he shouted: “ ‘fallen! fallen is babylon the great!’ she has become a dwelling for demons and a haunt for every impure spirit, a haunt for every unclean bird, a haunt for every unclean and detestable animal.
"you are not yet fifty years old," the jews said to him, "and you have seen abraham!"
jesus said to them, “you will indeed drink from my cup, but to sit at my right or left is not for me to grant. these places belong to those for whom they have been prepared by my father.”
a kind of tree which has long thorns all over its trunk.
as for the people who dig comotes, they dumpt the comotes into the water because they will wash them first.
he led them out of egypt and performed wonders and signs in egypt, at the red sea and for forty years in the wilderness.
we are not like moses, who would put a veil over his face to prevent the israelites from seeing the end of what was passing away.
cucumber.
then they were willing to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat reached the shore where they were heading.
then he told her, "for such a reply, you may go; the demon has left your daughter."
large
scratch head with the ball of the fingers
root; getting roots
cargoes of gold, silver, precious stones and pearls; fine linen, purple, silk and scarlet cloth; every sort of citron wood, and articles of every kind made of ivory, costly wood, bronze, iron and marble;
you-sing. smear some wet lime on the betelnut.
for everyone looks out for his own interests, not those of jesus christ.
they enter the traps now because it’s the season for making kaingin.
so he came to a town in samaria called sychar, near the plot of ground jacob had given to his son joseph.
blanket
downpayment
a seashell
stop
deliver weak, ineffective blows
saying to them, “go to the village ahead of you, and at once you will find a donkey tied there, with her colt by her. untie them and bring them to me.
simon has described to us how god first intervened to choose a people for his name from the gentiles.
when a person becomes emaciated, the side of his hip bone protrudes
thomas said to him, "my lord and my god!"
brilliant red bird (same as binti)
fragrant herb used in cooking
altar of rattan leaves
in fact, the law requires that nearly everything be cleansed with blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness.
so he said to the man who took care of the vineyard, 'for three years now i've been coming to look for fruit on this fig tree and haven't found any. cut it down! why should it use up the soil?'
surface dive.
take effect, as a medicine
to extend
to set, as of the sun
the back
as for the woman, she spread the flooring apart and that was where the spear passed through which was used to spear her enemy.
we always thank god, the father of our lord jesus christ, when we pray for you,
[it's necessary] that [the girls] don't disobey what you have told them.
then they spit in his face and struck him with their fists. others slapped him
ask the lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.”
the mixture is buried in the ground for two days before finding it to have become the agkud delicacy.
but they kept shouting, "crucify him! crucify him!"
then what did you go out to see? a prophet? yes, i tell you, and more than a prophet.
very strong; sturdy
a shelter will be built on the raft.
in this way they will lay up treasure for themselves as a firm foundation for the coming age, so that they may take hold of the life that is truly life.
that bulanbulan plant, its glow is very bright.
“this man,” they charged, “is persuading the people to worship god in ways contrary to the law.”
invitation to wrestle playfully
what we sew won’t finished.
pasita fed tumbasoy because she wasn’t embarrassed.
these two were picked up enroute. they were brought along.
for i am not ashamed of the gospel, because it is the power of god that brings salvation to everyone who believes: first to the jew, then to the gentile.
welt from insect bite
burrow
because we know that the one who raised the lord jesus from the dead will also raise us with jesus and present us with you to himself.
“you are the salt of the earth. but if the salt loses its saltiness, how can it be made salty again? it is no longer good for anything, except to be thrown out and trampled underfoot.
plead for mercy
to exclaim
there was someone who cast a knife at his companion but it just happened to lodge in the wall.
sound of a human or animal voice
we are just temporary residents here on the earth.
through whom also he went and preached to the spirits in prison
but jesus immediately said to them: “take courage! it is i. don’t be afraid.”
to get something in the eye
hey didn't join [the fields] by cutting
go over the horizon
to open up as a book
forget someone has died
name of a creek and a village
but you say that if a man says to his father or mother: 'whatever help you might otherwise have received from me is corban' (that is, a gift devoted to god), then you no longer let him do anything for his father or mother.
to swell up
if there is a landslide (lit. ground which landslides), the trees become uprooted and fall.
all the neighbors were filled with awe, and throughout the hill country of judea people were talking about all these things.
in which you used to live when you followed the ways of this world and of the ruler of the kingdom of the air, the spirit who is now at work in those who are disobedient.
but each one is tempted when, by his own evil desire, he is dragged away and enticed.
having canceled the written code, with its regulations, that was against us and that stood opposed to us; he took it away, nailing it to the cross.
we will haul it downriver.
turn the radio down.
but they kept shouting, "crucify him! crucify him!"
the water testifies
his winnowing fork is in his hand to clear his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his barn, but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
since many are boasting in the way the world does, i too will boast.
“haven’t you read,” he replied, “that at the beginning the creator ‘made them male and female,’
harmonica
the dog's fur dropped out.
keep stoking the fire because we’re hungry.
so that with one mind and one voice you may glorify the god and father of our lord jesus christ.
refuse to eat, drink or move
buy
peter replied, “even if all fall away on account of you, i never will.”
terminate.
they came to a place called golgotha (which means “the place of the skull”).
to be too full, to have overeaten so as to be uncomfortable
he didn't catch the ball which was thrown because it passed him but another person was able to catch it
even though it is small [it’s ok]
lift up both of your hands so that you can be rescued from drowning.
curved weeding tool similar to a sythe
david and goliath, they came at each other when they fought each other.
even
“is this your son?” they asked. “is this the one you say was born blind? how is it that now he can see?”
i ask then: did god reject his people? by no means! i am an israelite myself, a descendant of abraham, from the tribe of benjamin.
we are out of betelchew.
and this is my prayer: that your love may abound more and more in knowledge and depth of insight,
when paul was called in, tertullus presented his case before felix: “we have enjoyed a long period of peace under you, and your foresight has brought about reforms in this nation.  everywhere and in every way, most excellent felix, we acknowledge this with profound gratitude.
to touch each other
they examined me and wanted to release me, because i was not guilty of any crime deserving death.
to stress or emphasize something spoken.
and they took offense at him. but jesus said to them, “a prophet is not without honor except in his own town and in his own home.”
you were generous toward maambago.
bite off [the tails] of the shrimps.
trigger
but they kept quiet because on the way they had argued about who was the greatest.
round hollow brass bells
and hope does not put us to shame, because god’s love has been poured out into our hearts through the holy spirit, who has been given to us.
and no one dared to ask him any more questions.
cool off something
whoever tries to keep their life will lose it, and whoever loses their life will preserve it.
when the plane landed and the people helped deliver your things to the house, they took them all the way to the house. they took them directly upstairs. this is considered an act of service for which there is no charge.
i tell you that something greater than the temple is here.
if there is something which has hurt someone's feelings, there is that which makes a person upset because something was said which hurt [that person's] feelings.
the pay up front means, whatever he requests, we will go ahead and give it.
so he reasoned in the synagogue with both jews and god-fearing greeks, as well as in the marketplace day by day with those who happened to be there.
the angel answered, “the holy spirit will come on you, and the power of the most high will overshadow you. so the holy one to be born will be called the son of god.
chew and suck on
and god placed all things under his feet and appointed him to be head over everything for the church,
a large, multicolored poisonous snake.
sneak up on someone in a stooping position
light
large hard bamboo
green tobacco (salingsing)
i saw the holy city, the new jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from god, prepared as a bride beautifully dressed for her husband.
and then twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on his head. they put a staff in his right hand. then they knelt in front of him and mocked him. “hail, king of the jews!” they said.
and the lord's servant must not quarrel; instead, he must be kind to everyone, able to teach, not resentful.
all the people answered, “his blood is on us and on our children!”
they are beside themselves with anxiety about the raiders.
for whoever keeps the whole law and yet stumbles at just one point is guilty of breaking all of it.
but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of jesus, his son, purifies us from all sin.
neither of them had the money to pay him back, so he forgave the debts of both. now which of them will love him more?”
have a withered hand or foot.
swamp
i don't know.
rotten, mushy, decomposed; to rot, to become crumbly
and you also are among those gentiles who are called to belong to jesus christ.
loosen
and saul approved of their killing him. on that day a great persecution broke out against the church in jerusalem, and all except the apostles were scattered throughout judea and samaria.  godly men buried stephen and mourned deeply for him.
there are days when we don’t have an appetite. we choose what we desire to eat.
he who has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says to the churches. he who overcomes will not be hurt at all by the second death.
metal grate or platform on the hearth for setting pots on
cook by boiling in water
come here because i will listen to your stomach if your stomach growls. maybe you have worms.
winnowing tray
however, as it is written: "no eye has seen, no ear has heard, no mind has conceived what god has prepared for those who love him" --
everyone who heard him was amazed at his understanding and his answers.
if the tooth is chiseled off, it will be easier to pull out
the servant’s master took pity on him, canceled the debt and let him go.
small girl
yet, because moses gave you circumcision (though actually it did not come from moses, but from the patriarchs), you circumcise a child on the sabbath.
break off at stem and fall
while paul was waiting for them in athens, he was greatly distressed to see that the city was full of idols.
day after day every priest stands and performs his religious duties; again and again he offers the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins.
if he cries to go along, he wants to go with his mother.
“no good tree bears bad fruit, nor does a bad tree bear good fruit.
let the word of christ dwell in you richly as you teach and admonish one another with all wisdom, and as you sing psalms, hymns and spiritual songs with gratitude in your hearts to god.
for god did not appoint us to suffer wrath but to receive salvation through our lord jesus christ.
that wasn’t cut off carefully.
i'll express [something] because here’s something i’d like to have from you.
even elizabeth your relative is going to have a child in her old age, and she who was said to be unable to conceive is in her sixth month.
so they decided to use the money to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for foreigners.
the meaning is uncluttered, straight and our understanding [of the words] is clear.
namesake
sound of many people stepping on flooring
suitor
and the second is like it: ‘love your neighbor as yourself.’
accomplish
i have told you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe.
rattle
a kind of vine.
rush someone; emphasize
when the men came to jesus, they said, “john the baptist sent us to you to ask, ‘are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?’”
for our light and momentary troubles are achieving for us an eternal glory that far outweighs them all.
something used as a remedy.
give her as much torment and grief as the glory and luxury she gave herself. in her heart she boasts, ‘i sit enthroned as queen. i am not a widow; i will never mourn.’
as obedient children, do not conform to the evil desires you had when you lived in ignorance.
but jesus turned and rebuked them,
hand this man over to satan for the destruction of the flesh, so that his spirit may be saved on the day of the lord.
greedy
therefore, get rid of all moral filth and the evil that is so prevalent and humbly accept the word planted in you, which can save you.
we’ll leave early in the morning.
kobbiung tune.
zither
to experience or encounter.
abundant
we have different gifts, according to the grace given to each of us. if your gift is prophesying, then prophesy in accordance with your faith;
to rest.
she has no veins yet.
the lord’s hand was with them, and a great number of people believed and turned to the lord.
move backwards
for this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife,
if we cross a river, if we are not able to discover the shallow places because the water is bubbly, we will be carried away by the current to where it is deep. we will have to swim.
fare
soft spot on baby's head (fontanel)
there is no one to watch her children so she won't be able to dig camotes.
this will take place on the day when god judges people’s secrets through jesus christ, as my gospel declares.
the person who worked at a another location, he received a message from his wife by cell phone [saying], “carry through to return home to kapalong next week.
the greatest among you will be your servant.
because he almost died for the work of christ, risking his life to make up for the help you could not give me.
short bamboo nose flute
should we pay or shouldn't we?"
woe to you, teachers of the law and pharisees, you hypocrites! you clean the outside of the cup and dish, but inside they are full of greed and self-indulgence.
shake out the rice.
therefore, my brothers, be all the more eager to make your calling and election sure. for if you do these things, you will never fall,
when jesus came down from the mountainside, large crowds followed him.
there’s a lot of this rice.
(for the law made nothing perfect), and a better hope is introduced, by which we draw near to god.
"where, o death, is your victory? where, o death, is your sting?"
to be suspicious
we’ll pick [them] up along the way.
hang by one's hands or feet
do your best to get here before winter. eubulus greets you, and so do pudens, linus, claudia and all the brothers.
to one's left
for just as each of us has one body with many members, and these members do not all have the same function,
encircle
he who descended is the very one who ascended higher than all the heavens, in order to fill the whole universe.)
for this reason, when i could stand it no longer, i sent to find out about your faith. i was afraid that in some way the tempter had tempted you and that our labors might have been in vain.
howl
he answered, ‘then i beg you, father, send lazarus to my family,
he said to them, “you are the ones who justify yourselves in the eyes of others, but god knows your hearts. what people value highly is detestable in god’s sight.
vagina.
but to sit at my right or left is not for me to grant. these places belong to those for whom they have been prepared."
a kind of bird about the size of a crow
this calls for wisdom. if anyone has insight, let him calculate the number of the beast, for it is man's number. his number is 666
in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.
my parent-in-law made an agreement with me that i would live with my parent-in-laws for the duration of one year so that i could help [her] with her work.
the seed that fell among thorns stands for those who hear, but as they go on their way they are choked by life’s worries, riches and pleasures, and they do not mature.
scrape
whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and i will raise him up at the last day.
you used to walk in these ways, in the life you once lived.
stuff one’s mouth with food
pick it up with the cloth.
to beat something with one drumstick (on a hanging gong)
the days will come upon you when your enemies will build an embankment against you and encircle you and hem you in on every side.
and pleaded earnestly with him, "my little daughter is dying. please come and put your hands on her so that she will be healed and live."
when we strike a flint stone, sparks fly out.
to the pure, all things are pure, but to those who are corrupted and do not believe, nothing is pure. in fact, both their minds and consciences are corrupted.
terrified person
these men went on ahead and waited for us at troas.
stray from a path
after this his wife elizabeth became pregnant and for five months remained in seclusion.
wrap around, as a snake on a branch
owl
thick
you then, my son, be strong in the grace that is in christ jesus.
my sheep listen to my voice; i know them, and they follow me.
the older people go out to a field of matured secondary growth and have a ceremony to determine whether it would be good to cut the growth on that piece of ground for a field.
while talking with him, peter went inside and found a large gathering of people.
so that, " 'they may be ever seeing but never perceiving, and ever hearing but never understanding; otherwise they might turn and be forgiven!' "
there is no need for me to write to you about this service to the saints.
to leave, as people who move
mimic
i'll shoo the chickens with “saa”.
in a loud voice she exclaimed: “blessed are you among women, and blessed is the child you will bear!
active (as in a child or monkey always moving)
go over the horizon
he saw the disciples straining at the oars, because the wind was against them. about the fourth watch of the night he went out to them, walking on the lake. he was about to pass by them,
grunt of a pig, especially when frightened
a man was there by the name of zacchaeus; he was a chief tax collector and was wealthy.
follow up the waxing with skating
“what do you want me to do for you?” “lord, i want to see,” he replied.
some men came down from judea to antioch and were teaching the brothers: "unless you are circumcised, according to the custom taught by moses, you cannot be saved."
then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free."
live as free men, but do not use your freedom as a cover-up for evil; live as servants of god.
spouse
as jesus was sitting on the mount of olives, the disciples came to him privately. “tell us,” they said, “when will this happen, and what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the age?”
i tell you the truth, wherever the gospel is preached throughout the world, what she has done will also be told, in memory of her."
the reason utù is whispering to to his friend is so that his mother and father will not know that he will accompany his friend to go to manila.
perhaps this is your size
rattan is what we use to reinforce it.
give me [some] soap.
impette wouldn’t eat when you were gone
pleat, as material when sewing
to spit as of cat or dog; to hiss, sniff in disgust.
he did not say this because he cared about the poor but because he was a thief; as keeper of the money bag, he used to help himself to what was put into it.
it is better, if it is god's will, to suffer for doing good than for doing evil.
some have in fact already turned away to follow satan.
to crow
everyone will be salted with fire. "salt is good, but if it loses its saltiness, how can you make it salty again? have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with each other."
after paul and silas came out of the prison, they went to lydia's house, where they met with the brothers and encouraged them. then they left.
because a great door for effective work has opened to me, and there are many who oppose me.
if the afternoon of a day is nice and the time is around five in the afternoon and the clouds are red, [there is] a sunset.
be affected by an evil spirit
custom, manners.
as for the sweet potatoes, they are bulging and cracking the soil.
for whoever wants to save their life will lose it, but whoever loses their life for me will find it.
illness
but they laughed at him.
yet, because moses gave you circumcision (though actually it did not come from moses, but from the patriarchs), you circumcise a child on the sabbath.
husked rice; raw, half-cooked rice
and in fact, you do love all the brothers throughout macedonia. yet we urge you, brothers, to do so more and more
another time he went into the synagogue, and a man with a shriveled hand was there.
a turkey is the only “chicken” i know of that fluffs up. when it sees a person it fluffs itself up.
as for those agitators, i wish they would go the whole way and emasculate themselves!
but i tell you, elijah has come, and they have done to him everything they wished, just as it is written about him."
so he came to a town in samaria called sychar, near the plot of ground jacob had given to his son joseph.
if a woman does not cover her head, she should have her hair cut off; and if it is a disgrace for a woman to have her hair cut or shaved off, she should cover her head.
i’ll move in with the americans [and] work for them.
against all hope, abraham in hope believed and so became the father of many nations, just as it had been said to him, “so shall your offspring be.”
tremble as in a trance or possession
the person who is first to speak, that is the one who initiates the discussion.
to miraculously heal.
the merchants who sold these things and gained their wealth from her will stand far off, terrified at her torment. they will weep and mourn
then he entered the temple area and began driving out those who were selling.
now before the rich man could grab a stick.
you killed the author of life, but god raised him from the dead. we are witnesses of this.
but when the king came in to see the guests, he noticed a man there who was not wearing wedding clothes.
if i have the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and all knowledge, and if i have a faith that can move mountains, but have not love, i am nothing.
tychicus, the dear brother and faithful servant in the lord, will tell you everything, so that you also may know how i am and what i am doing.
for we know that our old self was crucified with him so that the body ruled by sin might be done away with, that we should no longer be slaves to sin—
then jesus' mother and brothers arrived. standing outside, they sent someone in to call him.
the person with good character: he isn’t a liar, doesn’t gossip, is afraid to do bad things, and humbles himself.
if the foot should say, "because i am not a hand, i do not belong to the body," it would not for that reason cease to be part of the body.
to break (glass, water pole, cooking pot)
push hard
uproot, pull up.
noon
at this i fell at his feet to worship him. but he said to me, “don’t do that! i am a fellow servant with you and with your brothers and sisters who hold to the testimony of jesus. worship god! for it is the spirit of prophecy who bears testimony to jesus.”
blind boil
at this they tried to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him, because his time had not yet come.
at dawn he appeared again in the temple courts, where all the people gathered around him, and he sat down to teach them.
it is a tree that when struck with a knife its body bleeds.
and if anyone takes words away from this book of prophecy, god will take away from him his share in the tree of life and in the holy city, which are described in this book.
it is necessary that no one will doubt that which he is telling them.
because through christ jesus the law of the spirit who gives life has set you free from the law of sin and death.
fat will make one's stomach feel uncomfortable.
therefore we are sending judas and silas to confirm by word of mouth what we are writing.
and he has given him authority to judge because he is the son of man.
jesus entered jericho and was passing through.
for some say, “his letters are weighty and forceful, but in person he is unimpressive and his speaking amounts to nothing.”
and so all israel will be saved, as it is written: "the deliverer will come from zion; he will turn godlessness away from jacob.
for it is by grace you have been saved, through faith—and this is not from yourselves, it is the gift of god—
pursue, as someone fleeing
the pharisees heard the crowd whispering such things about him. then the chief priests and the pharisees sent temple guards to arrest him.
heap of tobacco
"i will be a father to you, and you will be my sons and daughters, says the lord almighty."
jesus came, took the bread and gave it to them, and did the same with the fish.
travel downriver by raft
among the crowds there was widespread whispering about him. some said, "he is a good man."
then they hurled insults at him and said, "you are this fellow's disciple! we are disciples of moses!
and they began to accuse him, saying, "we have found this man subverting our nation. he opposes payment of taxes to caesar and claims to be christ, a king."
we don't have anything to loan because [we just have enough] left for one meal.
sound of water splashing
avoid godless chatter, because those who indulge in it will become more and more ungodly.
there in maambago there were those who were caused to plant corn. but later on, when it was time to harvest, those who sowed were not able to harvest
offspring of a dog, weasel, or mongoose
chain
but grow in the grace and knowledge of our lord and savior jesus christ. to him be glory both now and forever! amen.
when you lean on something for floatation you line up your body with the bamboo [pole]. you use your hands to paddle
if anyone speaks in a tongue, two--or at the most three--should speak, one at a time, and someone must interpret.
it is certainly not a lie because you have shown it to me
is/was here, or there (close by)
the next day moses came upon two israelites who were fighting. he tried to reconcile them by saying, ‘men, you are brothers; why do you want to hurt each other?’
jesus answered, “i am the way and the truth and the life. no one comes to the father except through me.”
think about
when the sabbath was over, mary magdalene, mary the mother of james, and salome bought spices so that they might go to anoint jesus' body.
women received back their dead, raised to life again. others were tortured and refused to be released, so that they might gain a better resurrection.
the child took three steps.
i tell you that in the same way there will be more rejoicing in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninetynine righteous persons who do not need to repent.
their bodies were brought back to shechem and placed in the tomb that abraham had bought from the sons of hamor at shechem for a certain sum of money.
to be inadvertently pulled up or plucked out
the son of jesse, the son of obed, the son of boaz, the son of salmon, the son of nahshon,
listen, my dear brothers: has not god chosen those who are poor in the eyes of the world to be rich in faith and to inherit the kingdom he promised those who love him?
not until halfway through the feast did jesus go up to the temple courts and begin to teach.
the word aku, is not the same as atu. the meaning sense is different.
and then what he will ask is, [whether] if he is able to borrow one thousand [pesos], if perhaps he will charge interest
the child threw something at his companion.
bite aggressively
a person who has caught a pig delivers a forkful to each house.
just as the son of man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”
as for a person exalting himself, when in a discussion, he loudly brags and says, "my own name is that which is able to lift up our companion who is overwhelmed by a problem."
burn snails
i’ll get you off by yourself.
to search for a pig
fall
they are senseless, faithless, heartless, ruthless.
small, non-stinging honey bee.
don't
when the apostles returned, they reported to jesus what they had done. then he took them with him and they withdrew by themselves to a town called bethsaida,
a stream that joins the liboganon at the same place the magimon river flows into the liboganon.
we put in at syracuse and stayed there three days.
jesus left there and went to his hometown, accompanied by his disciples.
the person who desires many women, that is a lustful person.
some have in fact already turned away to follow satan.
a spring
made of rocks such as a stone wall.
gleam (shiny object)
i have received full payment and even more; i am amply supplied, now that i have received from epaphroditus the gifts you sent. they are a fragrant offering, an acceptable sacrifice, pleasing to god.
we are chased by a pig which is protecting its offspring.
if we are severely dizzy, we will vomit.
for he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight. in love
when he had gone indoors, the blind men came to him, and he asked them, “do you believe that i am able to do this?” “yes, lord,” they replied.
groin
kind of red rice; a mat woven of small and narrow strips
if someone shivers, they begin to have chills.
a hundred
but the seed falling on good soil refers to someone who hears the word and understands it. this is the one who produces a crop, yielding a hundred, sixty or thirty times what was sown.”
only let us live up to what we have already attained.
true, correct; to verify or witness something as true; to use something as a guarantee.
weak
prohibit
there in the mountains, amò is what they use amò to address [him]when they call [their] father.
soot
greet one another with a holy kiss. all the churches of christ send greetings.
they are inadvertently sitting next to each other.
a weight; on a net or fishing line; an anchor.
stuff one’s mouth with food
cluck
the word of the lord spread through the whole region.
as for the present-day people who have come later, there is a custom to have an outhouse for defecating and so that is the only place people will go to to defecate.
"there will be weeping there, and gnashing of teeth, when you see abraham, isaac and jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of god, but you yourselves thrown out.
but it is your custom for me to release to you one prisoner at the time of the passover. do you want me to release 'the king of the jews'?"
predict
grater
above all, you must understand that no prophecy of scripture came about by the prophet's own interpretation.
as we have already said, so now i say again: if anybody is preaching to you a gospel other than what you accepted, let them be under god’s curse!
so after i have completed this task and have made sure that they have received this fruit, i will go to spain and visit you on the way.
come from
locust.
but the hand of him who is going to betray me is with mine on the table.
as the crowds increased, jesus said, "this is a wicked generation. it asks for a miraculous sign, but none will be given it except the sign of jonah.
small bird such as a rice bird
then the kings of the earth, the princes, the generals, the rich, the mighty, and every slave and every free man hid in caves and among the rocks of the mountains.
neither of them had the money to pay him back, so he forgave the debts of both. now which of them will love him more?”
beautiful; to have a good attitude toward someone.
but they shouted, “take him away! take him away! crucify him!” “shall i crucify your king?” pilate asked. “we have no king but caesar,” the chief priests answered.
we have spoken freely to you, corinthians, and opened wide our hearts to you.
when i saw her, i was greatly astonished. then the angel said to me: "why are you astonished? i will explain to you the mystery of the woman and of the beast she rides, which has the seven heads and ten horns.
when he had gone indoors, the blind men came to him, and he asked them, “do you believe that i am able to do this?” “yes, lord,” they replied.
what relation
all people, we each have a name.
hemorrhage
it is possible for the plane to fly because it has been repaired.
later jesus found him at the temple and said to him, “see, you are well again. stop sinning or something worse may happen to you.”
you are witnesses of these things.
in case
digging stick
‘nine hundred gallons of olive oil,’ he replied. the manager told him, ‘take your bill, sit down quickly, and make it four hundred and fifty.’
"teacher," said john, "we saw a man driving out demons in your name and we told him to stop, because he was not one of us."
we are out of betelchew.
diligently search for viand or camotes during hunger season
menstruate
while jesus was teaching in the temple courts, he asked, "how is it that the teachers of the law say that the christ is the son of david?
cause to drop out
but after i have risen, i will go ahead of you into galilee."
mangolian spot
but the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; in those days they will fast."
name of village
the jailer called for lights, rushed in and fell trembling before paul and silas.
hang to one side; be off center, esp. of one's head
take refuge
when we look in a mirror, we see our reflection.
camote; camote plants
a greyish white bird, yellow bellied sapsucker
"and now, compelled by the spirit, i am going to jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there.
excited
a reddish-brown and orange chicken with long feet
spleen; term of address to a woman by a man.
do you not know that we will judge angels? how much more the things of this life!
but how he can see now, or who opened his eyes, we don't know. ask him. he is of age; he will speak for himself."
hoard
shed, as a skin or soft shell.
because i know that i will soon put it aside, as our lord jesus christ has made clear to me.
wrap around, as a snake on a branch
pole for a raft
he also told them this parable: “can the blind lead the blind? will they not both fall into a pit?
to permit
grow fast
if i have a guests, i will apologize that they will be left behind here at the house.
but abraham replied, ‘son, remember that in your lifetime you received your good things, while lazarus received bad things, but now he is comforted here and you are in agony.
when crabs are wrapped in a leaf, we tie them up securely by wrapping a vine around them several times.
but everything should be done in a fitting and orderly way.
"you are a king, then!" said pilate. jesus answered, "you are right in saying i am a king. in fact, for this reason i was born, and for this i came into the world, to testify to the truth. everyone on the side of truth listens to me."
to give
he is able to deal gently with those who are ignorant and are going astray, since he himself is subject to weakness.
"sir," they said, "from now on give us this bread."
sit with legs extended
come from, originate
their bodies are [destructively] affected [by what they do]
for the spine to protrude
woodpeeker
dirty teeth.
“but not during the festival,” they said, “or there may be a riot among the people.”
i know your deeds, your love and faith, your service and perseverance, and that you are now doing more than you did at first.
fold up
for the son of god, jesus christ, who was preached among you by me and silas and timothy, was not "yes" and "no," but in him it has always been "yes."
as soon as i tried to request [something], he gave [it] to me.
the apostles performed many signs and wonders among the people. and all the believers used to meet together in solomon’s colonnade.
if the tooth is chiseled off, it will be easier to pull out
so too, at the present time there is a remnant chosen by grace.
coconut wine
as for a nursing mother, she abstains from eating foods served at someone else's house in case it might cause the child to die.
so that christ may dwell in your hearts through faith. and i pray that you, being rooted and established in love,
for one's legs and thighs to be spread apart when sitting or walking
and you have been given fullness in christ, who is the head over every power and authority.
don't you know that you yourselves are god's temple and that god's spirit lives in you?
i persecuted the followers of this way to their death, arresting both men and women and throwing them into prison,
“but very truly i tell you, it is for your good that i am going away. unless i go away, the advocate will not come to you; but if i go, i will send him to you.”
slices
jesus said to the servants, “fill the jars with water”; so they filled them to the brim.
for god did not send his son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him.
he was with god in the beginning.
"are you so dull?" he asked. "don't you see that nothing that enters a man from the outside can make him 'unclean'?
when you were dead in your sins and in the uncircumcision of your sinful nature, god made you alive with christ. he forgave us all our sins,
to timothy, my dear son: grace, mercy and peace from god the father and christ jesus our lord.
if satan drives out satan, he is divided against himself. how then can his kingdom stand?
water which is sediment free is also transparent. that which is sediment-free and that which is clear, they have nothing which blocks
every high priest is selected from among the people and is appointed to represent the people in matters related to god, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
"do not stop him," jesus said. "no one who does a miracle in my name can in the next moment say anything bad about me,
therefore put on the full armor of god, so that when the day of evil comes, you may be able to stand your ground, and after you have done everything, to stand.
to stagger as one who is drunk and keeps losing his balance and falling or almost falling over.
have chills as a person with malaria
and put it at the apostles’ feet, and it was distributed to anyone who had need.
make every effort to live in peace with all men and to be holy; without holiness no one will see the lord.
but when he asks, he must believe and not doubt, because he who doubts is like a wave of the sea, blown and tossed by the wind.
the father loves the son and has placed everything in his hands.
but glory, honor and peace for everyone who does good: first for the jew, then for the gentile.
saying to them, "go to the village ahead of you, and just as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there, which no one has ever ridden. untie it and bring it here.
simon and his companions went to look for him,
now listen, you who say, "today or tomorrow we will go to this or that city, spend a year there, carry on business and make money."
forgive
if there is no interpreter, the speaker should keep quiet in the church and speak to himself and god.
not to become easily unsettled or alarmed by the teaching allegedly from us—whether by a prophecy or by word of mouth or by letter—asserting that the day of the lord has already come.
roundworms.
for with shrieks, impure spirits came out of many, and many who were paralyzed or lame were healed.
even if it is high or if it is short, thick or thin and surrounds a house or the yard, it is called an alad fense.
as soon as they left the synagogue, they went with james and john to the home of simon and andrew.
jesus replied, “blessed are you, simon son of jonah, for this was not revealed to you by flesh and blood, but by my father in heaven.
fish
about that time she became sick and died, and her body was washed and placed in an upstairs room.
if anyone sees his brother commit a sin that does not lead to death, he should pray and god will give him life. i refer to those whose sin does not lead to death. there is a sin that leads to death. i am not saying that he should pray about that.
esophagus
jesus said, "have the people sit down." there was plenty of grass in that place, and they sat down (about five thousand men were there).
cook the pork by boiling
a hat is also a head-covering but it has a name.
flatten the surface of a board
when he had led them out to the vicinity of bethany, he lifted up his hands and blessed them.
stay there, eating and drinking whatever they give you, for the worker deserves his wages. do not move around from house to house.
jab
to what can i compare this generation? they are like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling out to others:
the sixth angel sounded his trumpet, and i heard a voice coming from the horns of the golden altar that is before god
our pelvic bone pulls apart when we give birth.
to move next to
if it seems that one has not brushed one's teeth for several days, that's dirty-teeth.
therefore, in the present case i advise you: leave these men alone! let them go! for if their purpose or activity is of human origin, it will fail.
resist him, standing firm in the faith, because you know that your brothers throughout the world are undergoing the same kind of sufferings.
cause to drop out
as he walked along, he saw levi son of alphaeus sitting at the tax collector's booth. "follow me," jesus told him, and levi got up and followed him.
if anyone has caused grief, he has not so much grieved me as he has grieved all of you to some extent—not to put it too severely.
now it was the custom at the feast to release a prisoner whom the people requested.
they arrived again in jerusalem, and while jesus was walking in the temple courts, the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders came to him.
when he had received the drink, jesus said, "it is finished." with that, he bowed his head and gave up his spirit.
for god did not send his son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him.
armed warriors
look back and forth
brass arm bracelets
be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving each other, just as in christ god forgave you.
every two days
the older person will say, "get a chicken to waver to remove your bad luck."
not given to drunkenness, not violent but gentle, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money.
we have an altar from which those who minister at the tabernacle have no right to eat.
to become wrinkled
anyone who speaks in a tongue edifies themselves, but the one who prophesies edifies the church.
now, brothers, i want to remind you of the gospel i preached to you, which you received and on which you have taken your stand.
for the holy spirit will teach you at that time what you should say."
woodpecker
if [someone] goes pighunting and comes across a pig, the dog will bark at the pig.
then levi held a great banquet for jesus at his house, and a large crowd of tax collectors and others were eating with them.
that is why the jews seized me in the temple courts and tried to kill me.
time of cutting rice field
screech, as a baby monkey when frightened
i have told you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe.
god is the one who has the greatest power.
if there is [something] dirty on the winnowing tray, tap it on the bottom [so the dirt/debris will drop off].
which of the two did what his father wanted?” “the first,” they answered. jesus said to them, “truly i tell you, the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering the kingdom of god ahead of you.
the person said, “don't continue because there is no rice in patil because it has been consumed.
her teeth are close together.
and, “a stone that causes people to stumble and a rock that makes them fall.” they stumble because they disobey the message—which is also what they were destined for.
jesus knew what they were thinking and asked, “why are you thinking these things in your hearts?
for if, while we were god’s enemies, we were reconciled to him through the death of his son, how much more, having been reconciled, shall we be saved through his life!
then peter said, “ananias, how is it that satan has so filled your heart that you have lied to the holy spirit and have kept for yourself some of the money you received for the land?
who was an attendant of the proconsul, sergius paulus. the proconsul, an intelligent man, sent for barnabas and saul because he wanted to hear the word of god.
for i am with you, and no one is going to attack and harm you, because i have many people in this city.”
his winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will clear his threshing floor, gathering his wheat into the barn and burning up the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
for they had not understood about the loaves; their hearts were hardened.
“where is your faith?” he asked his disciples. in fear and amazement they asked one another, “who is this? he commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him.”
large yellow camote
a destitute person who is always being scolded, when the criticism affects him deeply emotionally so that he can no longer endure it, he will have to react.
struggle to free oneself
therefore, anyone who rejects this instruction does not reject a human being but god, the very god who gives you his holy spirit.
the space under a house.
to transmit disease
a kind of sugarcane.
a fan palm
when evening came, jesus arrived with the twelve.
and the master of the banquet tasted the water that had been turned into wine. he did not realize where it had come from, though the servants who had drawn the water knew. then he called the bridegroom aside
you may be sure that such a man is warped and sinful; he is self-condemned.
water skippers that glide over the surface of backwaters or still pools.
who will not fear you, o lord, and bring glory to your name? for you alone are holy. all nations will come and worship before you, for your righteous acts have been revealed."
become shriveled with age
then simon peter came along behind him and went straight into the tomb. he saw the strips of linen lying there,
“to the angel of the church in pergamum write: these are the words of him who has the sharp, double-edged sword.
now bethany was less than two miles from jerusalem,
woven rattan sieve placed in the mouth of a bamboo lime container
slice
for even when we were with you, we gave you this rule: “the one who is unwilling to work shall not eat.”
while the man held on to peter and john, all the people were astonished and came running to them in the place called solomon’s colonnade.
touching each other
the house is getting old.
unaccustomed standing
they saw what seemed to be tongues of fire that separated and came to rest on each of them.
and when the blood of your martyr stephen was shed, i stood there giving my approval and guarding the clothes of those who were killing him.'
to this they replied, "you were steeped in sin at birth; how dare you lecture us!" and they threw him out.
the sun is setting when it goes past the mountain as it is disappearing over the horizon.
he contradicted that which was said by someone else.
to swim (as an eel)
his clothes became dazzling white, whiter than anyone in the world could bleach them.
long, fancy spear with metal decorations
slip off
if anyone says, "i love god," yet hates his brother, he is a liar. for anyone who does not love his brother, whom he has seen, cannot love god, whom he has not seen.
as for a person who is stepping down to the ground from his house, if he happens to be doing that at the same time a dove calls, he/she will not go ahead with climbing down to the ground.
the center of the eggshell is hollow because the yolk is not there.
as for the person of good character, [he]  isn't a liar, he doesn't [start] scandals. he is afraid to do bad things. he humbles himself. if he is scolded, he doesn't let it bother him; he just [purposely] forgets it; he doesn't pay attention to it.
a person who stuffs his mouth with food makes a fistful of food and feeds himself.
apply blood to something during a sacrifice
strength (physical)
after the men had gone a long time without food, paul stood up before them and said: "men, you should have taken my advice not to sail from crete; then you would have spared yourselves this damage and loss.
so this weak brother or sister, for whom christ died, is destroyed by your knowledge.
equip you with everything good for doing his will, and may he work in us what is pleasing to him, through jesus christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. amen.
we pour water when we want to drink.
the money earned from his bamboo was used up by the person whom he had entrusted
stop
to be cursed, especially in regard to stewardship or rice and camote crops
why? because i do not love you? god knows i do!
seeds of the pangi fruit
if or when a spring is new, it cannot be stretched because it is strong.
pointing to his disciples, he said, “here are my mother and my brothers.
at this, the man's ears were opened, his tongue was loosened and he began to speak plainly.
incomplete
they cut the meat up and then divided it nto shares and then they had the person who carried the pig on his back take the head.
when ananias heard this, he fell down and died. and great fear seized all who heard what had happened.
citrus fruit
if, however, i am guilty of doing anything deserving death, i do not refuse to die. but if the charges brought against me by these jews are not true, no one has the right to hand me over to them. i appeal to caesar!"
corn cob with missing grains
smooth breath, feeling of peace
aware of their discussion, jesus asked them: "why are you talking about having no bread? do you still not see or understand? are your hearts hardened?
then they made jason and the others post bond and let them go.
desire, want
and the dragon stood on the shore of the sea.
for it will come upon all those who live on the face of the whole earth.
and constant friction between people of corrupt mind, who have been robbed of the truth and who think that godliness is a means to financial gain.
but when the son of paul's sister heard of this plot, he went into the barracks and told paul.
to become marked by an impression from something
therefore, my dear friends, as you have always obeyed--not only in my presence, but now much more in my absence--continue to work out your salvation with fear and trembling,
take
and whoever lives and believes in me will never die. do you believe this?"
fat
sting
husbands, in the same way be considerate as you live with your wives, and treat them with respect as the weaker partner and as heirs with you of the gracious gift of life, so that nothing will hinder your prayers.
after he used [the saw], he loaned it (lit. caused it to be borrowed) again to another person.
all the people were astonished and said, “could this be the son of david?”
any of the manobo people
push the raft
the man answered, "now that is remarkable! you don't know where he comes from, yet he opened my eyes.
to do something very well, carefully or accurately
a person who climbs a tree always moves upwards.
forest, world.
the person whos legs are crippled, he scoots along as he moves along
"blessed is the coming kingdom of our father david!" "hosanna in the highest!"
two blind men were sitting by the roadside, and when they heard that jesus was going by, they shouted, “lord, son of david, have mercy on us!”
for a raft, there are two cross pieces which are tied to the outriggers.
in the temple courts he found people selling cattle, sheep and doves, and others sitting at tables exchanging money.
should we pay or shouldn't we?"
next
by you
doctora said, “how many weeks will you be at your home place?” usì said, “even so that's ok because i will return soon.”
kind of blackened spear
there are different kinds of working, but in all of them and in everyone it is the same god at work.
ornamented, decorated, dressed up person.
news of this spread through all that region.
" 'lord,' i replied, 'these men know that i went from one synagogue to another to imprison and beat those who believe in you.
which of the two did what his father wanted?” “the first,” they answered. jesus said to them, “truly i tell you, the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering the kingdom of god ahead of you.
then i saw in the right hand of him who sat on the throne a scroll with writing on both sides and sealed with seven seals.
to become blind
term of address to an unmarried man, used by women and between men as a sign of respect.
spider
a person who has no love for his companion ostracizes him.
kind of apusow (white)
bend one’s knees, kneel
i tell you the truth, if anyone keeps my word, he will never see death."
cough
separate
if a person has fainted as a result of an illness, we will try to resuscitate him.
soon the whole city was in an uproar. the people seized gaius and aristarchus, paul's traveling companions from macedonia, and rushed as one man into the theater.
"everything is permissible"--but not everything is beneficial. "everything is permissible"--but not everything is constructive.
to submit
be shy
not by works, so that no one can boast.
mouth
the crowds that went ahead of him and those that followed shouted, “hosanna to the son of david!” “blessed is he who comes in the name of the lord!” “hosanna in the highest heaven!”
i have given them the glory that you gave me, that they may be one as we are one:
lung.
when the wheat sprouted and formed heads, then the weeds also appeared.
he did not enter by means of the blood of goats and calves; but he entered the most holy place once for all by his own blood, having obtained eternal redemption.
the widow who is really in need and left all alone puts her hope in god and continues night and day to pray and to ask god for help.
since the harbor was unsuitable to winter in, the majority decided that we should sail on, hoping to reach phoenix and winter there. this was a harbor in crete, facing both southwest and northwest.
the word of the lord spread through the whole region.
what does scripture say? “abraham believed god, and it was credited to him as righteousness.”
rush someone; emphasize
if we claim to be without sin, we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us.
the brothers there had heard that we were coming, and they traveled as far as the forum of appius and the three taverns to meet us. at the sight of these men paul thanked god and was encouraged.
if we go inside a cavern, there will be light in front of us
if anyone forces you to go one mile, go with them two miles.
deep
there was an estate nearby that belonged to publius, the chief official of the island. he welcomed us to his home and showed us generous hospitality for three days.
stop
to make tentative plans to do something.
if anyone wants to be contentious about this, we have no other practice-- nor do the churches of god.
gather together
kind of white rice
tiny bird
large, huge
when the disciples heard this, they fell facedown to the ground, terrified.
to be acquainted with or familiar with something.
my bolo won’t cut.
if my child avails himself/herself of an opportunity to eat at someone else's house, i will scold him/her.
when jacob heard that there was grain in egypt, he sent our forefathers on their first visit.
they were told not to harm the grass of the earth or any plant or tree, but only those people who did not have the seal of god on their foreheads.
mix different kinds together
you followed [the river] around its bends.
for we do not write you anything you cannot read or understand. and i hope that, as you have understood us in part, you will come to understand fully that you can boast of us just as we will boast of you in the day of the lord jesus.
a kind of rattan.
kind of climbing bamboo used for weaving.
throat
horse
kind of soft, fragrant wood similar to mahogany, has a reddish center. it is used to make boats or roof shingles.
the goal of this command is love, which comes from a pure heart and a good conscience and a sincere faith.
when sweet potatoes are cooked, ig there is inadequate fuel, it will be hard; it will be hard because it is still raw.
now instead, you ought to forgive and comfort him, so that he will not be overwhelmed by excessive sorrow.
bald
it’ll stop bleeding.
for to be sure, he was crucified in weakness, yet he lives by god’s power. likewise, we are weak in him, yet by god’s power we will live with him in our dealing with you.
the mountain is sloping.
ask for something; request; beg
when joseph and mary had done everything required by the law of the lord, they returned to galilee to their own town of nazareth.
in one hour such great wealth has been brought to ruin!'
here
his disciples asked him what this parable meant.
when he came near the place where the road goes down the mount of olives, the whole crowd of disciples began joyfully to praise god in loud voices for all the miracles they had seen:
and the secrets of his heart will be laid bare. so he will fall down and worship god, exclaiming, "god is really among you!"
peter asked her, “tell me, is this the price you and ananias got for the land?” “yes,” she said, “that is the price.”
selfish person
submit to one another out of reverence for christ.
the rattan fruit is astringent when we chew it.
thousand
some claimed that he was. others said, “no, he only looks like him.” but he himself insisted, “i am the man.”
when the son of man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, he will sit on his glorious throne.
that which he caused to be attributed to someone else, was used to cover up (lit. rub out) his fault.
and one of them struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his right ear.
ask the lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.”
to intersect
to be silent; to cease talking.
were you a slave when you were called? don’t let it trouble you—although if you can gain your freedom, do so.
uncircumcised
but peter had to wait outside at the door. the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, came back, spoke to the servant girl on duty there and brought peter in.
test the depth
owl
add onto
to the church of the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven. you have come to god, the judge of all men, to the spirits of righteous men made perfect,
after six days jesus took with him peter, james and john the brother of james, and led them up a high mountain by themselves.
cook
kind of fish
navel
measure off
but the worries of this life, the deceitfulness of wealth and the desires for other things come in and choke the word, making it unfruitful.
too full
it is a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of the living god.
there is no one who understands; there is no one who seeks god.
hurry up and take it to its owner. we have them hurry to have it taken to its owner.
to address a little girl
let's stop for a while because someone has called us.
a person who cuts individual strands of baluy or lunrun grass, uses it to make a pouch in which to put seed rice.
patient; sick person
accustomed.
but i am afraid that just as eve was deceived by the serpent’s cunning, your minds may somehow be led astray from your sincere and pure devotion to christ.
sight
but exclude the outer court; do not measure it, because it has been given to the gentiles. they will trample on the holy city for 42 months.
then pilate took jesus and had him flogged.
for there is nothing hidden that will not be disclosed, and nothing concealed that will not be known or brought out into the open.
cedar tree
stomachache
the monkey really stinks.
become shriveled with age
five
when the cavalry arrived in caesarea, they delivered the letter to the governor and handed paul over to him.
the abu-on [bird], isn't so white; [it's color] is mixed.
to quarrel
through these he has given us his very great and precious promises, so that through them you may participate in the divine nature and escape the corruption in the world caused by evil desires.
cargoes of gold, silver, precious stones and pearls; fine linen, purple, silk and scarlet cloth; every sort of citron wood, and articles of every kind made of ivory, costly wood, bronze, iron and marble;
uneven
claw
evenly stirred (no uncooked granules)
to become skinny, such as malnourished plants
one of the first atas
jesus replied, "if i glorify myself, my glory means nothing. my father, whom you claim as your god, is the one who glorifies me.
a spirit seizes him and he suddenly screams; it throws him into convulsions so that he foams at the mouth. it scarcely ever leaves him and is destroying him.
the grace of the lord jesus be with god's people. amen.
a person who makes a recipe from the tubod plant, grates the coconut with which he makes coconut milk.
in him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the lord.
make-believe
pestle with a carved top
esophagus
to be born with a split lip
possibly
at that time if anyone says to you, 'look, here is the christ !' or, 'look, there he is!' do not believe it.
in those days peter stood up among the believers (a group numbering about a hundred and twenty)
you are still worldly. for since there is jealousy and quarreling among you, are you not worldly? are you not acting like mere humans?
then their eyes were opened and they recognized him, and he disappeared from their sight.
since we live by the spirit, let us keep in step with the spirit.
if we often get [these kind of] swellings, we are very much afflicted with blind boils.
my daughter, jeany, fell from a santol tree.
sharpening stone, whetstone
we will pick just one chupa of ripened red pepper fruits.
i do not want you to be ignorant of this mystery, brothers, so that you may not be conceited: israel has experienced a hardening in part until the full number of the gentiles has come in.
we will sleep outside on the ground; we will lay down there.
a pack (wrapped and bound food or items)
do you not know that he who unites himself with a prostitute is one with her in body? for it is said, “the two will become one flesh.”
kind of banana
confront
"still another said, 'i just got married, so i can't come.
as for the children, they blow up the balloon so that it will become rounded as it inflates.
round hollow brass bells
i was disappointed since i thought i would be given some.
give the people these instructions, so that no one may be open to blame.
kind of weed that emits an irritating gas
he went to him and bandaged his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. then he put the man on his own donkey, brought him to an inn and took care of him.
if the [other person] agrees, you will make the purchase transaction.
when i kindled a fire with wood that has been ignited with fire, it was ignited and became coals.
"or suppose a king is about to go to war against another king. will he not first sit down and consider whether he is able with ten thousand men to oppose the one coming against him with twenty thousand?
when jesus heard this, he said to him, “you still lack one thing. sell everything you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. then come, follow me.”
to cause or predict bad luck
bamboo shelves of cupboard.
the handle of the pan is broken.
when the liboganon river flooded, the corn which was newly harvested was carried downriver by the current.
they were all encouraged and ate some food themselves.
for even christ did not please himself but, as it is written: “the insults of those who insult you have fallen on me.”
for we have heard him say that this jesus of nazareth will destroy this place and change the customs moses handed down to us.”
he has a steward who is the guardian of the plants and that is kalayag.
wrist
the next day paul and the rest of us went to see james, and all the elders were present.
and he is not served by human hands, as if he needed anything, because he himself gives all men life and breath and everything else.
to the weak i became weak, to win the weak. i have become all things to all people so that by all possible means i might save some.
then the disciples went back to where they were staying.
the woman removed her laundry when she collected it.
where did they go?
“what are we going to do with these men?” they asked. “everyone living in jerusalem knows they have performed a notable sign, and we cannot deny it.
there they crucified him, and with him two others—one on each side and jesus in the middle.
bring together
a bagakis is a braided belt made from horse hair which has been studded with beads.
find out.
he could not do any miracles there, except lay his hands on a few sick people and heal them.
chewed off
fall apart
firstfruits thanksgiving ceremony
therefore, since we are surrounded by such a great cloud of witnesses, let us throw off everything that hinders and the sin that so easily entangles, and let us run with perseverance the race marked out for us.
but while everyone was sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat, and went away.
follower of a chief.
philip found nathanael and told him, “we have found the one moses wrote about in the law, and about whom the prophets also wrote—jesus of nazareth, the son of joseph.”
about midnight paul and silas were praying and singing hymns to god, and the other prisoners were listening to them.
i tell you the truth, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
“when moses was forty years old, he decided to visit his own people, the israelites.
seeing a fig tree by the road, he went up to it but found nothing on it except leaves. then he said to it, “may you never bear fruit again!” immediately the tree withered.
a black bead
your eye is the lamp of your body. when your eyes are good, your whole body also is full of light. but when they are bad, your body also is full of darkness.
then he sent other servants to them, more than the first time, and the tenants treated them the same way.
we forget about our companions [when] we simply abandon them.
because of this oath, jesus has become the guarantee of a better covenant.
when it is nighttime, the frog places himself in the center of the eggs.
so those who rely on faith are blessed along with abraham, the man of faith.
poetic term for kiss
that is why i am so eager to preach the gospel also to you who are in rome.
to be slow to return.
i’ll yank your head back after a while.
warm oneself
cotton
but the crowds learned about it and followed him. he welcomed them and spoke to them about the kingdom of god, and healed those who needed healing.
corn
at harvest time he sent a servant to the tenants to collect from them some of the fruit of the vineyard.
go down a creek to a river junction
to flap, as a rooster flaps its wings.
what about the one whom the father set apart as his very own and sent into the world? why then do you accuse me of blasphemy because i said, 'i am god's son'?
banana blossom
split wood
i tell you that in the same way there will be more rejoicing in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninetynine righteous persons who do not need to repent.
the ship was caught by the storm and could not head into the wind; so we gave way to it and were driven along.
lean on something with one's chest.
small dark lizard
“woe to you, chorazin! woe to you, bethsaida! for if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in tyre and sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
the promises were spoken to abraham and to his seed. scripture does not say “and to seeds,” meaning many people, but “and to your seed,” meaning one person, who is christ.
give something
for this son of mine was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.' so they began to celebrate.
to strike, or hit as light strikes an object.
no widow may be put on the list of widows unless she is over sixty, has been faithful to her husband,
when someone has just begun to harvest, other people cannot go there because the harvesters will suffer the negative result of being interrupted and become ill.
they are inadvertently sitting next to each other.
jesus did not let him, but said, "go home to your family and tell them how much the lord has done for you, and how he has had mercy on you."
kind of palm tree
i press on toward the goal to win the prize for which god has called me heavenward in christ jesus.
and throw that worthless servant outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
comfort
for in the gospel the righteousness of god is revealed—a righteousness that is by faith from first to last, just as it is written: “the righteous will live by faith.”
men swear by someone greater than themselves, and the oath confirms what is said and puts an end to all argument.
after the reading from the law and the prophets, the leaders of the synagogue sent word to them, saying, “brothers, if you have a word of exhortation for the people, please speak.”
gathering place
we continued our voyage from tyre and landed at ptolemais, where we greeted the brothers and sisters and stayed with them for a day.
one of you will say to me: “then why does god still blame us? for who is able to resist his will?”
with the tongue we praise our lord and father, and with it we curse men, who have been made in god's likeness.
where " 'their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.'
you have condemned and murdered innocent men, who were not opposing you.
in despair
but zacchaeus stood up and said to the lord, "look, lord! here and now i give half of my possessions to the poor, and if i have cheated anybody out of anything, i will pay back four times the amount."
the how that has caught fire, it's necessary
dear children, do not let anyone lead you astray. he who does what is right is righteous, just as he is righteous.
i sent for him.
today, i won't go to my field because we are being obstructed by the raiders.
then he looked at those seated in a circle around him and said, "here are my mother and my brothers! whoever does god's will is my brother and sister and mother."
to get married
judas and silas, who themselves were prophets, said much to encourage and strengthen the believers.
for even if there are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth (as indeed there are many “gods” and many “lords”),
but whoever drinks the water i give them will never thirst. indeed, the water i give them will become in them a spring of water welling up to eternal life.”
fillet
there is nothing concealed that will not be disclosed, or hidden that will not be made known.
caiaphas was the one who had advised the jewish leaders that it would be good if one man died for the people.
it has given me great joy to find some of your children walking in the truth, just as the father commanded us.
so we make it our goal to please him, whether we are at home in the body or away from it.
shelf, contradict
they discussed this with one another and said, "it is because we have no bread."
he said to them, “if any of you has a sheep and it falls into a pit on the sabbath, will you not take hold of it and lift it out?
if any woman who is a believer has widows in her family, she should help them and not let the church be burdened with them, so that the church can help those widows who are really in need.
to plant rice out of season
after spending eight or ten days with them, festus went down to caesarea. the next day he convened the court and ordered that paul be brought before him.
no one who lives in him keeps on sinning. no one who continues to sin has either seen him or known him.
tell a secret
the person who was the leader of a certain place received a written warning which said, "tell your subjects not to go to the outposts because the soldiers will be coming upriver to see the villages."
another reason i wrote you was to see if you would stand the test and be obedient in everything.
she went and told those who had been with him and who were mourning and weeping.
and he made known to us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in christ
rectangular woven container used for carrying lunch or items
he’s frustrated because he has no chicken to feed to his visitors.
kind of tree, wood used in rice charm
listen, my dear brothers: has not god chosen those who are poor in the eyes of the world to be rich in faith and to inherit the kingdom he promised those who love him?
john’s disciples came and took his body and buried it. then they went and told jesus.
kind of bangkawan used to carry a wild rooster
if a child gets sick who is always bathing [in the river], the older people say that he afflicted by an evil spirit because he was affected by a long-haired spirit [which lives in the water].
shark fin
waning moon
buntit is keeping vigil over likanay’s body.
for it is with your heart that you believe and are justified, and it is with your mouth that you profess your faith and are saved.
as you know, we consider blessed those who have persevered. you have heard of job's perseverance and have seen what the lord finally brought about. the lord is full of compassion and mercy.
the hip, especially of the fleshy part but not the joint.
one day jesus said to his disciples, “let us go over to the other side of the lake.” so they got into a boat and set out.
jesus had compassion on them and touched their eyes. immediately they received their sight and followed him.
and he took the children in his arms, put his hands on them and blessed them.
what is my offense?
unsymmetrical, crooked, or uneven mouth
for in him you have been enriched in every way—with all kinds of speech and with all knowledge—
as they led him away, they seized simon from cyrene, who was on his way in from the country, and put the cross on him and made him carry it behind jesus.
the lightbulb is above us.
we are not going too far in our boasting, as would be the case if we had not come to you, for we did get as far as you with the gospel of christ.
certainly not! if that were so, how could god judge the world?
nor thieves nor the greedy nor drunkards nor slanderers nor swindlers will inherit the kingdom of god.
finish eating up rest of food
when the soldiers crucified jesus, they took his clothes, dividing them into four shares, one for each of them, with the undergarment remaining. this garment was seamless, woven in one piece from top to bottom.
wander
“but now i am going to him who sent me. none of you asks me, ‘where are you going?’”
twist and turn in road
festus said: "king agrippa, and all who are present with us, you see this man! the whole jewish community has petitioned me about him in jerusalem and here in caesarea, shouting that he ought not to live any longer.
jesus replied, “not everyone can accept this word, but only those to whom it has been given.
and the angels who did not keep their positions of authority but abandoned their own home--these he has kept in darkness, bound with everlasting chains for judgment on the great day.
grandfather amasig heard that i was worried about my saw.
if you build a fire and blow on it, you will get smoke in your eyes and they start smarting.
“no one, sir,” she said. “then neither do i condemn you,” jesus declared. “go now and leave your life of sin.”
a person who travels with the current as he goes downriver by raft, he will be watching out so that the front part will not get rammed into a cliff so that it won't be capsized.
as a prisoner for the lord, then, i urge you to live a life worthy of the calling you have received.
peter said, “explain the parable to us.”
brothers, if someone is caught in a sin, you who are spiritual should restore him gently. but watch yourself, or you also may be tempted.
cover
they spit on him, and took the staff and struck him on the head again and again.
satan was still thinking about what next he could use to test jesus.
nauseated
i myself am convinced, my brothers, that you yourselves are full of goodness, complete in knowledge and competent to instruct one another.
in fact, when we were with you, we kept telling you that we would be persecuted. and it turned out that way, as you well know.
if the ground is on a downward incline, the water will inadvertently flow.
a person whose mouth is wide open as he laughs because he is very amused continually happens to grin.
the lord turned and looked straight at peter. then peter remembered the word the lord had spoken to him: "before the rooster crows today, you will disown me three times."
jesus asked him, “what is your name?” “legion,” he replied, because many demons had gone into him.
needle
so jesus said, "when you have lifted up the son of man, then you will know that i am the one i claim to be and that i do nothing on my own but speak just what the father has taught me.
the expert in the law replied, “the one who had mercy on him.” jesus told him, “go and do likewise.”
these two were picked up enroute. they were brought along.
he has a wife on each arm.
sharp stakes  or spears
when a person dies, [he/she] is buried in the ground.
an orchid.
am i not free? am i not an apostle? have i not seen jesus our lord? are you not the result of my work in the lord?
when you were slaves to sin, you were free from the control of righteousness.
arrowhead.
while he was blessing them, he left them and was taken up into heaven.
but he who disowns me before men will be disowned before the angels of god.
cut
when god raised up his servant, he sent him first to you to bless you by turning each of you from your wicked ways.”
but since you do not believe what he wrote, how are you going to believe what i say?”
the fish hardens when we put it in the freezer.
bite
for the appeal we make does not spring from error or impure motives, nor are we trying to trick you.
so he called in each one of his master’s debtors. he asked the first, ‘how much do you owe my master?’
when they brought the colt to jesus and threw their cloaks over it, he sat on it
“i am not referring to all of you; i know those i have chosen. but this is to fulfill this passage of scripture: ‘he who shared my bread has turned against me.’”
"the god who made the world and everything in it is the lord of heaven and earth and does not live in temples built by hands.
to sit or squat
a rat
someone like emuel, because they have become ariola, he is [my] second cousin
now there was a man in jerusalem called simeon, who was righteous and devout. he was waiting for the consolation of israel, and the holy spirit was on him.
i am checking [to see] whether that which i i have heard is true.
for i have not hesitated to proclaim to you the whole will of god.
a large, monkey-eating eagle.
an egg which stinks and has not yet developed and will not hatch, that has become underdeveloped and spoiled.
therefore let us stop passing judgment on one another. instead, make up your mind not to put any stumbling block or obstacle in your brother's way.
when jesus saw her, he called her forward and said to her, "woman, you are set free from your infirmity."
[as for] the raider(s), sometimes there are six, five or four people.
jesus entered the temple courts, and, while he was teaching, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him. “by what authority are you doing these things?” they asked. “and who gave you this authority?”
stain; transfer color
arouse envy
their conduct is in accord.
long ago, the old days, the past
a woman is bound to her husband as long as he lives. but if her husband dies, she is free to marry anyone she wishes, but he must belong to the lord.
"then he said to those standing by, 'take his mina away from him and give it to the one who has ten minas.'
“brothers and fathers, listen now to my defense.”
the woman didn't expect that those words of her male-companion would be fulfilled that he would return on that day.
we are stringing beads.
should
get tired of
therefore in one day her plagues will overtake her: death, mourning and famine. she will be consumed by fire, for mighty is the lord god who judges her.
he replied, "i will also ask you a question. tell me,
when he was placed outside, pharaoh’s daughter took him and brought him up as her own son.
but the ministry jesus has received is as superior to theirs as the covenant of which he is mediator is superior to the old one, and it is founded on better promises.
shout in triumph
nor are you to be called instructors, for you have one instructor, the messiah.
love song style.
a person who was wounded took a piece of material and wrapped it around his wound.
to poison fish with the fruit of the lagtang vine
mirror
but there are some jews from the province of asia, who ought to be here before you and bring charges if they have anything against me.
he included him in the fault. he included those who weren't involved.
“a voice is heard in ramah, weeping and great mourning, rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted, because they are no more.”
who have wandered away from the truth. they say that the resurrection has already taken place, and they destroy the faith of some.
about twelve o'clock.
up
i charge you before the lord to have this letter read to all the brothers and sisters.
the chief said, “with respect to the debt of the residents of kapugi, that debt has nothing to do with maambago.”
instead, they had some points of dispute with him about their own religion and about a dead man named jesus who paul claimed was alive.
persuade
indeed herod and pontius pilate met together with the gentiles and the people of israel in this city to conspire against your holy servant jesus, whom you anointed.
therefore let us keep the festival, not with the old bread leavened with malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
rush it to its destination (lit. you rush to take it). we will cause it to be taken quickly [to its destination].
and put everything under his feet.? in putting everything under him, god left nothing that is not subject to him. yet at present we do not see everything subject to him.
now there is in store for me the crown of righteousness, which the lord, the righteous judge, will award to me on that day—and not only to me, but also to all who have longed for his appearing.
not only that, but rebekah’s children were conceived at the same time by our father isaac.  yet, before the twins were born or had done anything good or bad—in order that god’s purpose in election might stand:
follow up the waxing with skating
so the pharisees said to one another, “see, this is getting us nowhere. look how the whole world has gone after him!”
here is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance: christ jesus came into the world to save sinners—of whom i am the worst.
as for a pig which is pregnant, her stomach alternately bulges as the unborn piglets move about.
if we step on the ripe fruit of the papaya, it will be squashed.
a house, if it only has glass windows, they are transparent because we can see through to the other side because our view is unobstructed.
the dog is digging because he is relentlessly pursuing a rat there in a hole in the ground. someone says, “what is that dog after?
when it is dry season, then the sunny period is prolonged and the creeks become puddles as they dry up from the dry weather.
soon
in a large house there are articles not only of gold and silver, but also of wood and clay; some are for noble purposes and some for ignoble.
but if the unbeliever leaves, let it be so. the brother or the sister is not bound in such circumstances; god has called us to live in peace.
but in these last days he has spoken to us by his son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom also he made the universe.
bathing place for many
when one of the pharisees invited jesus to have dinner with him, he went to the pharisee’s house and reclined at the table.
she would not give audience to him because she had a lot of work and also [because] she was avoiding  him.
cure or heal
tell
he would answer, "this is the news which i have to tell about our place."
tip
and yet his work has been finished since the creation of the world. for somewhere he has spoken about the seventh day in these words: "and on the seventh day god rested from all his work."
because when melchizedek met abraham, levi was still in the body of his ancestor.
example
to some who were confident of their own righteousness and looked down on everyone else, jesus told this parable:
all the believers were together and had everything in common.
(as it is written in the law of the lord, “every firstborn male is to be consecrated to the lord”),
white breasted dove with red head.
when the sun has newly arisen, as for a house, it will be struck by the rays of the sun and the shadow will become long.
and because of his words many more became believers.
then peter remembered the word jesus had spoken: “before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times.” and he went outside and wept bitterly.
and on the highway, there is that which has been placed in the center which also glows.
“believe me when i say that i am in the father and the father is in me; or at least believe on the evidence of the works themselves.”
for many are invited, but few are chosen.”
lie curled up, coiled (as a snake preparing to strike)
a stuttering person is slow to express [his words] because his words repeatedly snag.
i tell you the truth, anyone who will not receive the kingdom of god like a little child will never enter it."
white material
i am jealous for you with a godly jealousy. i promised you to one husband, to christ, so that i might present you as a pure virgin to him.
to be afflicted with a sinus-like headache caused by withheld information.
take a break (by changing location and activities away from home)
i am reminded of your sincere faith, which first lived in your grandmother lois and in your mother eunice and, i am persuaded, now lives in you also.
in my judgment, she is happier if she stays as she is—and i think that i too have the spirit of god.
i have domesticated animals.
when we feel ok about something, it means that we are free of apprehension. we trust in him.
he didn't catch the ball which was thrown because it passed him but another person was able to catch it
“the thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy; i have come that they may have life, and have it to the full.”
and he said to them: "you have a fine way of setting aside the commands of god in order to observe your own traditions!
follower, or subject of someone
the disciples were even more amazed, and said to each other, "who then can be saved?"
there is power in the lightning because it is able to set trees on fire.
a deep scar or depression in the flesh left from a former wound.
garden
look squeeze on this papaya, maybe it is ripe.
don't grab and pull on my dress because it will tear.
be implicated; accused
suffer
he who has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says to the churches. he who overcomes will not be hurt at all by the second death.
overtake and go ahead of
so pilate decided to grant their demand.
when jesus came out wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe, pilate said to them, “here is the man!”
to eat alone when there is no other choice
the lambus is used to stop the rain.
when morning came, he called his disciples to him and chose twelve of them, whom he also designated apostles:
to be show-through
he is the one who comes after me, the straps of whose sandals i am not worthy to untie.”
group reciprocal work
baby head louse, baby bedbug
disappear
those who want to make a good impression outwardly are trying to compel you to be circumcised. the only reason they do this is to avoid being persecuted for the cross of christ.
did i exploit you through any of the men i sent to you?
“you stiff-necked people! your hearts and ears are still uncircumcised. you are just like your ancestors: you always resist the holy spirit!
dirtied with dirt.
but understand this: if the owner of the house had known at what hour the thief was coming, he would not have let his house be broken into.
but peter made him get up. “stand up,” he said, “i am only a man myself.”
trust
it is impossible for those who have once been enlightened, who have tasted the heavenly gift, who have shared in the holy spirit, who have tasted the goodness of the word of god and the powers of the coming age, if they fall away, to be brought back to repentance, because to their loss they are crucifying the son of god all over again and subjecting him to public disgrace.
repeatedly come back
person’s chest.
at caesarea there was a man named cornelius, a centurion in what was known as the italian regiment.
carry on one's hip
therefore i do not run like a man running aimlessly; i do not fight like a man beating the air.
and would not allow anyone to carry merchandise through the temple courts.
i urged titus to go to you and i sent our brother with him. titus did not exploit you, did he? did we not walk in the same footsteps by the same spirit?
that woman was selfish and did not give her neighbor any rice.
a locust.
new growth of bamboo before leafing out.
then they looked for a way to arrest him because they knew he had spoken the parable against them. but they were afraid of the crowd; so they left him and went away.
or is it only i and barnabas who lack the right to not work for a living?
the law is not based on faith; on the contrary, it says, “the person who does these things will live by them.”
cry
he looked around at them all, and then said to the man, “stretch out your hand.” he did so, and his hand was completely restored.
if a child becomes lame, one foot will draw up.
dry near a fire
new
"and if anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him to be thrown into the sea with a large millstone tied around his neck.
to poison
for the wages of sin is death, but the gift of god is eternal life in christ jesus our lord.
people will tell you, ‘there he is!’ or ‘here he is!’ do not go running off after them.
but i am sending the brothers in order that our boasting about you in this matter should not prove hollow, but that you may be ready, as i said you would be.
“come, see a man who told me everything i ever did. could this be the messiah?”
a person in our place who is lazy, we call a lazy (lit. inadequately cooked person because there isn’t any work he knows how to do. he has ability but doesn’t use it.
transparent
jesus answered, “even if i testify on my own behalf, my testimony is valid, for i know where i came from and where i am going. but you have no idea where i come from or where i am going.”
“do not think that i have come to abolish the law or the prophets; i have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them.
"teacher," they said, "moses wrote for us that if a man's brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man must marry the widow and have children for his brother.
[the color of the abu-on bird resembles the color of ashes. it isn't quite white; its [color] is mixed.
jesus got up and went with him, and so did his disciples.
when a manobo violin is played, its string is rubbed back and forth by its bow.
but if there is a means of defense, we who are living there won’t feel insecure because our living situation will be secure.
and the way of peace they do not know.”
algae or moss on trees or water
enclose, make an enclosure
grace be with you all.
at that time herod the tetrarch heard the reports about jesus,
small
to plant tobacco
two people are arm wrestling to see which of them is the strongest.
stick or bar used in weaving
they weren’t included
see kois (nudge, flick off)
when john, who was in prison, heard about the deeds of the messiah, he sent his disciples
and so upon you will come all the righteous blood that has been shed on earth, from the blood of righteous abel to the blood of zechariah son of berekiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar.
water which has a whirlpool, also has a center.
then some of our companions went to the tomb and found it just as the women had said, but him they did not see."
give as a free gift
wild boar
for they have shed the blood of your saints and prophets, and you have given them blood to drink as they deserve."
a person calls his chicken, whom he will feed corn, by saying, "kuru-kurù."
indeed, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of god.”
we do not want you to be uninformed, brothers and sisters, about the troubles we experienced in the province of asia. we were under great pressure, far beyond our ability to endure, so that we despaired of life itself.
but you say that if a man says to his father or mother: 'whatever help you might otherwise have received from me is corban' (that is, a gift devoted to god), then you no longer let him do anything for his father or mother.
and to make plain to everyone the administration of this mystery, which for ages past was kept hidden in god, who created all things.
complete a group, bring people together
to strangle
it would be great if the husband of tuning knew how to make a rice granary, however, he doesn't
mouth
he is coming with onesimus, our faithful and dear brother, who is one of you. they will tell you everything that is happening here.
"you do not know me or my father," jesus replied. "if you knew me, you would know my father also." he spoke these words while teaching in the temple area near the place where the offerings were put. yet no one seized him, because his time had not yet come.
to vent, as anger in such a way that people are taken by surprise
some time ago
when jesus saw his mother there, and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, "dear woman, here is your son,"
for he and all his companions were astonished at the catch of fish they had taken,
when they could not find a way to do this because of the crowd, they went up on the roof and lowered him on his mat through the tiles into the middle of the crowd, right in front of jesus.
at his gate was laid a beggar named lazarus, covered with sores
the people were amazed when they saw the mute speaking, the crippled made well, the lame walking and the blind seeing. and they praised the god of israel.
resemble or take after someone.
and the prayer offered in faith will make the sick person well; the lord will raise him up. if he has sinned, he will be forgiven.
why did you take a huge fistful of rice when we are really many?
outside, as of a house or yard
if you continue in your faith, established and firm, not moved from the hope held out in the gospel. this is the gospel that you heard and that has been proclaimed to every creature under heaven, and of which i, paul, have become a servant.
i was a stranger and you did not invite me in, i needed clothes and you did not clothe me, i was sick and in prison and you did not look after me.’
i planned to visit you on my way to macedonia and to come back to you from macedonia, and then to have you send me on my way to judea.
“lord,” ananias answered, “i have heard many reports about this man and all the harm he has done to your holy people in jerusalem.
when he saw that this met with approval among the jews, he proceeded to seize peter also. this happened during the festival of unleavened bread.
kill, murdered.
finger-like appendage of a crab or shrimp
oops! his shirt has been torn.
then the righteous will answer him, ‘lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink?
fetch
young coconut
“i have set you an example that you should do as i have done for you.”
formerly, when you did not know god, you were slaves to those who by nature are not gods.
and he is the head of the body, the church; he is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead, so that in everything he might have the supremacy.
wooden bar used in weaving
when they arrived, he said to them: “you know how i lived the whole time i was with you, from the first day i came into the province of asia.
do not be deceived: god cannot be mocked. a man reaps what he sows.
to pull up, as a weed; pull out by roots.
kind of dark-leaved plant with white flowers, the leaves and body of which are used as a food.
from noon until three in the afternoon darkness came over all the land.
to prepare god's people for works of service, so that the body of christ may be built up
and asked, “where is the one who has been born king of the jews? we saw his star when it rose and have come to worship him.”
newly pregnant
nervous talk
stab upward with a spear as through the floor
for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of god,
as the crowds increased, jesus said, "this is a wicked generation. it asks for a miraculous sign, but none will be given it except the sign of jonah.
the misty rain, it comes from the fog which drips.
god presented christ as a sacrifice of atonement, through the shedding of his blood—to be received by faith. he did this to demonstrate his righteousness, because in his forbearance he had left the sins committed beforehand unpunished—
for if anyone with a weak conscience sees you who have this knowledge eating in an idol's temple, won't he be emboldened to eat what has been sacrificed to idols?
hearing that jesus had silenced the sadducees, the pharisees got together.
tailess (chicken)
for it is with your heart that you believe and are justified, and it is with your mouth that you profess your faith and are saved.
the same thing happened to the second and third brother, right on down to the seventh.  finally, the woman died.
in debt
someone took away a portion of my land.
terrified at her torment, they will stand far off and cry: “ ‘woe! woe to you, great city, you mighty city of babylon! in one hour your doom has come!’
the person whos legs are crippled, he scoots along as he moves along
she’s clapping her hands.
"that servant who knows his master's will and does not get ready or does not do what his master wants will be beaten with many blows.
tip out; pour or dump
but i was lowered in a basket from a window in the wall and slipped through his hands.
ear wax
we repeatedly drop the seed which we are planting.
they said, "is this not jesus, the son of joseph, whose father and mother we know? how can he now say, 'i came down from heaven'?"
so also, when we were underage, we were in slavery under the elemental spiritual forces of the world.
where, then, is boasting? it is excluded. because of what law? the law that requires works? no, because of the law that requires faith.
we had just barely sat down when guests arrived and caught us as we were eating.
many evil spirits entered the house.
people who want to get rich fall into temptation and a trap and into many foolish and harmful desires that plunge men into ruin and destruction.
if anyone teaches otherwise and does not agree to the sound instruction of our lord jesus christ and to godly teaching,
to taste
kindling wood
the whole judean countryside and all the people of jerusalem went out to him. confessing their sins, they were baptized by him in the jordan river.
put something inside a cage or pen
a single item
the person whose legs are crippled, scoots forward as he moves about.
a small amount; just, simply; please.
the person who speaks forthrightly, his speech is straight. he does not speak in a roundabout way.
watch closely
if there is a horse which i would hold (lit. reserve), i will give a pig as a downpayment.
a person who does not pay attention to their own attitudes but then does not realize their own emotions.
when we dry corn in the sun, it will shrink because it is green.
a single turn is just one curve.
the teacher who returned to maniki, they took her as far as patil as they escorted her.
as for that relentless pursuing, an unmarried man keeps coming back until he can obtain that which he is requesting. it is like the person from whom he is begging is being forced to give.
until i make your enemies a footstool for your feet." '
“while i am in the world, i am the light of the world.”
one of them, the disciple whom jesus loved, was reclining next to him.
to leave water; climb up on bank from the river
and the god of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory in christ, after you have suffered a little while, will himself restore you and make you strong, firm and steadfast.
the wave(s) are/were very strong.
don’t i have the right to do what i want with my own money? or are you envious because i am generous?’
but the angel said to him: “do not be afraid, zechariah; your prayer has been heard. your wife elizabeth will bear you a son, and you are to call him john.
such a high priest meets our need-- one who is holy, blameless, pure, set apart from sinners, exalted above the heavens.
blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see god.
therefore, i declare to you today that i am innocent of the blood of all men.
if i have a guests, i will apologize that they will be left behind here at the house.
isaiah said this because he saw jesus' glory and spoke about him.
yellow bead
put to death, therefore, whatever belongs to your earthly nature: sexual immorality, impurity, lust, evil desires and greed, which is idolatry.
and in that place many believed in jesus.
i have seen and i testify that this is god’s chosen one.”
spider web
pilate answered, "what i have written, i have written."
"now i commit you to god and to the word of his grace, which can build you up and give you an inheritance among all those who are sanctified.
no one, then, should refuse to accept him. send him on his way in peace so that he may return to me. i am expecting him along with the brothers.
remember; think about as when friends will be separated and don’t want to be forgotten
hold someone in an embrace to restrain them
severe infection under the skin in fingers or toes
wood poles used in framework of house
just as moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness, so the son of man must be lifted up,
a person who makes a field for his yearly crop of rice but doesn't live to harvest his rice because he has died, he has died before reaching his harvest and so did not get to eat his rice.
when the crowd saw this, they were filled with awe; and they praised god, who had given such authority to man.
not
narrow passage between two cliffs on the kabungabungan creek.
he answered, “‘love the lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind’; and, ‘love your neighbor as yourself.’”
as he went along, he saw a man blind from birth.
if i am delayed, you will know how people ought to conduct themselves in god’s household, which is the church of the living god, the pillar and foundation of the truth.
for the perishable must clothe itself with the imperishable, and the mortal with immortality.
grow
the lastborn is the final offspring; she will not bear children again.
let your gentleness be evident to all. the lord is near.
to bring some part of one’s body above the surface of the water as a snake with only its head above the water
short-waisted blouse.
and i heard the altar respond: “yes, lord god almighty, true and just are your judgments.”
at once the girl hurried in to the king with the request: "i want you to give me right now the head of john the baptist on a platter."
as for a dog, when it chews on a bone, it makes a crunching sound.
where he stayed three months. because some jews had plotted against him just as he was about to sail for syria, he decided to go back through macedonia.
kausing nearly fell
jews demand miraculous signs and greeks look for wisdom,
when we get the bark of the langilan tree to wall a house, we pound its outer layer (lit. skin) so that it will come loose.
peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. “never, lord!” he said. “this shall never happen to you!”
woven rattan sieve placed in the mouth of a bamboo lime container
go inside
i’ll return in the future, about two years from now.
when a woman newly gives birth and is always bleeding, we knead the lower abdomen so that the uterus will contract and the bleeding will stop.
they disagreed among themselves and began to leave after paul had made this final statement: "the holy spirit spoke the truth to your forefathers when he said through isaiah the prophet:
to go to some location
brothers and sisters, choose seven men from among you who are known to be full of the spirit and wisdom. we will turn this responsibility over to them
but i will come to you very soon, if the lord is willing, and then i will find out not only how these arrogant people are talking, but what power they have.
the jailer told paul, "the magistrates have ordered that you and silas be released. now you can leave. go in peace."
flour, if we shake the flour sack, it will become dust because [the flour] becomes airborne.
and his interests are divided. an unmarried woman or virgin is concerned about the lord’s affairs: her aim is to be devoted to the lord in both body and spirit. but a married woman is concerned about the affairs of this world—how she can please her husband.
third right string of kobbiung
to be removed from something
he said to them: “it is not for you to know the times or dates the father has set by his own authority.
sniffle.
i know where you live—where satan has his throne. yet you remain true to my name. you did not renounce your faith in me, not even in the days of antipas, my faithful witness, who was put to death in your city—where satan lives.
spit
were they born just a month ago?
a crosswise slice, we sever by cutting off with a saw-like motion.
those two were in agreement with each other
"if you are the christ, " they said, "tell us."
the person who sleeps soundly, will be slow to awaken in the morning.
if you won't watch over [the children], go searching for something to eat.
to manage; with negative, not to be able to manage or resolve some situation.
engulfed in a problem (quarrel turns into war)
not by works, so that no one can boast.
already
after they had heard the king, they went on their way, and the star they had seen when it rose went ahead of them until it stopped over the place where the child was.  when they saw the star, they were overjoyed.
shoot with bow and arrow.
travel across a mountain slope
"when a strong man, fully armed, guards his own house, his possessions are safe. but when someone stronger attacks and overpowers him, he takes away the armor in which the man trusted and divides up the spoils.
"then i asked, 'who are you, lord?'
i do not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters, that i planned many times to come to you (but have been prevented from doing so until now) in order that i might have a harvest among you, just as i have had among the other gentiles.
it seemed good to the holy spirit and to us not to burden you with anything beyond the following requirements:
unhusked rice
a voice came from the cloud, saying, “this is my son, whom i have chosen; listen to him.”
taganay is the one to manipulate [the baby's position].
when they came up out of the water, the spirit of the lord suddenly took philip away, and the eunuch did not see him again, but went on his way rejoicing.
he will be slow to die. he has been given a long life. (lit. the placing of his breath is long.)
but if it is from god, you will not be able to stop these men; you will only find yourselves fighting against god.”
when all the people were being baptized, jesus was baptized too. and as he was praying, heaven was opened
but stephen, full of the holy spirit, looked up to heaven and saw the glory of god, and jesus standing at the right hand of god.
your forefathers ate the manna in the desert, yet they died
i glanced at out of the corner of  [my] eye.
everyone who does evil hates the light, and will not come into the light for fear that their deeds will be exposed.
enough.
have pity on me.
sharpen with a knife
quiet, shy
if i have a problem, i am not afraid to ask for help.
when the people heard this, they were cut to the heart and said to peter and the other apostles, “brothers, what shall we do?”
gorged stomach
but the word of the lord stands forever." and this is the word that was preached to you.
and there was war in heaven. michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon and his angels fought back.
taking jesus' body, the two of them wrapped it, with the spices, in strips of linen. this was in accordance with jewish burial customs.
laundry
failure
destroy
therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially to those who belong to the family of believers.
we drag the rattan when we return to the house.
tie the goat to something because it is eating the plants.
lumpy
if the word is just daral, it's meaning is different because we are rushing our companion to do something.
if your right eye causes you to stumble, gouge it out and throw it away. it is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole body to be thrown into hell.
“greater love has no one than this: to lay down one’s life for one’s friends.”
when in labor, the mother strains with much effort.
to avail oneself of an opportunity to eat
word used when bouncing a baby
a person whose mouth is wide open as he laughs because he is very amused continually happens to grin.
spark
when all the people who had gathered to witness this sight saw what took place, they beat their breasts and went away
again i ask: did they stumble so as to fall beyond recovery? not at all! rather, because of their transgression, salvation has come to the gentiles to make israel envious.
walk hunched over
among the crowds there was widespread whispering about him. some said, "he is a good man."
it was cold, and the servants and officials stood around a fire they had made to keep warm. peter also was standing with them, warming himself.
and do not give the devil a foothold.
a person who has chills feels cold because they have malaria.
to raise one’s eyebrows.
for some time he refused. but finally he said to himself, ‘even though i don’t fear god or care what people think,
facing
he contradicted that which was said by someone else.
piglet.
as scripture says, “anyone who believes in him will never be put to shame.”
"you are a king, then!" said pilate. jesus answered, "you are right in saying i am a king. in fact, for this reason i was born, and for this i came into the world, to testify to the truth. everyone on the side of truth listens to me."
when people’s children are sick, they quickly get a chicken for the shaman to perform a wave offering.
the bark of the lawa-an tree was loosened all the way to the tip [of the tree].
he said to them, “go!” so they came out and went into the pigs, and the whole herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and died in the water.
they will make up games to comfort those whose breath is hurting.
metal sheath
tail
when we cut down bamboo, we sharpen it because we will make it into a bamboo spear.
paul greeted them and reported in detail what god had done among the gentiles through his ministry.
since we have these promises, dear friends, let us purify ourselves from everything that contaminates body and spirit, perfecting holiness out of reverence for god.
not even those who are circumcised obey the law, yet they want you to be circumcised that they may boast about your flesh.
antidote
i’ll move in with the americans [and] work for them.
the person who gets provoked, even if what we say is small, he/she will be quick to become angry.
lizard with short back spines
land that is mostly flat but has some hills like the nauli area
he measured its wall and it was 144 cubits thick, by man's measurement, which the angel was using.
i do not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters, that i planned many times to come to you (but have been prevented from doing so until now) in order that i might have a harvest among you, just as i have had among the other gentiles.
the opening between the wall and the roof of a house.
to start a fire by making a sawing motion to produce friction and heat
during the days of jesus’ life on earth, he offered up prayers and petitions with fervent cries and tears to the one who could save him from death, and he was heard because of his reverent submission.
i was unconscious  for a half hour before i came to.
the creeks which have become shallow pools, we remove the water until it dries up and then we can catch the fish and other edible water creatures.
stop bearing
a wooden pole fastened between two sturdy trees (part of a pig trap)
for you, brothers, became imitators of god's churches in judea, which are in christ jesus: you suffered from your own countrymen the same things those churches suffered from the jews,
paul and barnabas appointed elders for them in each church and, with prayer and fasting, committed them to the lord, in whom they had put their trust.
to scoop with both hands cupped
this is why “it was credited to him as righteousness.”
even though we warned [that person] not to go to his field to fetch something for them to eat because there was a strong warning, he went anyway and was hit by the raiders. he was shot.
abraham replied, ‘they have moses and the prophets; let them listen to them.’
while he was still speaking a crowd came up, and the man who was called judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. he approached jesus to kiss him,
the [piece of] sharpened wood, that is the lever which is put underneath [the log which one intends to move].
i would have liked to keep him with me so that he could take your place in helping me while i am in chains for the gospel.
cotton
ride
"suppose one of you has a hundred sheep and loses one of them. does he not leave the ninety-nine in the open country and go after the lost sheep until he finds it?
to release, as a trigger of a trap.
rungs of a ladder
when they arrived, they prayed for the new believers there that they might receive the holy spirit,
now if the ministry that brought death, which was engraved in letters on stone, came with glory, so that the israelites could not look steadily at the face of moses because of its glory, transitory though it was,
how can you say to your brother, ‘brother, let me take the speck out of your eye,’ when you yourself fail to see the plank in your own eye? you hypocrite, first take the plank out of your eye, and then you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.
even some of the officials of the province, friends of paul, sent him a message begging him not to venture into the theater.
deer.
you take heed when you are corrected.
floor
scaffolding of a house.
to make a whispery
they are not to ‘honor their father or mother’ with it. thus you nullify the word of god for the sake of your tradition.
a kind of bird that calls during the dry season.
or again, how can anyone enter a strong man’s house and carry off his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man? then he can plunder his house.
forest, world.
wipe away
travel
the mountain is sloping.
namesake
harmonious relationship.
bite
if the mother is still at the house, [the term is] not yet iggalat leaving her child behind with someone but it is correct to have the child watched over by the older sibling because the mother will do laundry. she is near the house and will hear the child if he/she crys.
two hundred
prohibit
swift
the king was greatly distressed, but because of his oaths and his dinner guests, he did not want to refuse her.
the storm clouds can be shouted away if there is a shaman.
because i was confident of this, i planned to visit you first so that you might benefit twice.
we were given a free gift of eggs.
“as long as it is day, we must do the works of him who sent me. night is coming, when no one can work.”
a person has a circular growth of hair on his head which makes a swirl.
jesus sent him home, saying, "don't go into the village. "
dizzy
to be cured or treated
jesus said to them, “truly i tell you, at the renewal of all things, when the son of man sits on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of israel.
be self-controlled and alert. your enemy the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour.
there is no fear in love. but perfect love drives out fear, because fear has to do with punishment. the one who fears is not made perfect in love.
tongues, then, are a sign, not for believers but for unbelievers; prophecy, however, is for believers, not for unbelievers.
you know we never used flattery, nor did we put on a mask to cover up greed—god is our witness.
so then, each of us will give an account of himself to god.
“but woe to you who are rich, for you have already received your comfort.
a sticker such as a burr; something that sticks, such as adhesive tape
near the hearer
he must also have a good reputation with outsiders, so that he will not fall into disgrace and into the devil’s trap.
(all the people, even the tax collectors, when they heard jesus’ words, acknowledged that god’s way was right, because they had been baptized by john.
ruthie has a twin
"what shall i do, then, with the one you call the king of the jews?" pilate asked them.
sift
dance step in which one shuffles his feet
enter
lift one's legs above waist while walking
"but in those days, following that distress, " 'the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light;
masticate it well so that it will disintegrate; continually chew it so that you can swallow it.
when he was accused by the chief priests and the elders, he gave no answer.
pleat, as material when sewing
roast meat
delicious
chew on a bone
suddenly a sound like the blowing of a violent wind came from heaven and filled the whole house where they were sitting.
all domesticated animals have hips but chickens don't because their legs are attached to their sides.
do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul. rather, be afraid of the one who can destroy both soul and body in hell.
i wish that all of you were as i am. but each of you has your own gift from god; one has this gift, another has that.
if there are those in a some village who are under [someone's] authority, it seems that they are all his subjects.
a
we can give them a free gift when they return from far off.
dear friends, i am not writing you a new command but an old one, which you have had since the beginning. this old command is the message you have heard.
everything which lives, all of us here on earth die.
“praise be to the lord, the god of israel, because he has come to his people and redeemed them.
end or limit
to screech.
in the morning, as they went along, they saw the fig tree withered from the roots.
jesus answered, “truly i tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times.”
pulsate, as one's heart or pulse
chatter
to run out of patience with someone
i have received full payment and even more; i am amply supplied, now that i have received from epaphroditus the gifts you sent. they are a fragrant offering, an acceptable sacrifice, pleasing to god.
my bottom has become flattened
when the crowds heard philip and saw the signs he performed, they all paid close attention to what he said.
fuss, whine (as a child)
when it is dry season, then the sunny period is prolonged and the creeks become puddles as they dry up from the dry weather.
there was a person who had been murdered who se body was found sprawled out on the ground as he was lying there dead.
remember; think about as when friends will be separated and don’t want to be forgotten
and at his appointed season he brought his word to light through the preaching entrusted to me by the command of god our savior,
moses was educated in all the wisdom of the egyptians and was powerful in speech and action.
female pig or piglet
“i have set you an example that you should do as i have done for you.”
i say to you that many will come from the east and the west, and will take their places at the feast with abraham, isaac and jacob in the kingdom of heaven.
why are you cursing  me?
but when he saw the person who was wounded, he detoured. he passed by on the other side of the path.
edible grub
touch the monkey
for sin shall no longer be your master, because you are not under the law, but under grace.
truly i tell you, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the son of man coming in his kingdom.”
when they had crossed over, they landed at gennesaret and anchored there.
if our teeth are touching each other, it is difficult to remove the particles of food between the teeth.
i plead with you, brothers and sisters, become like me, for i became like you. you did me no wrong.
slippery
soak out poisonous sap before cooking
is this our chicken?
and i heard a sound from heaven like the roar of rushing waters and like a loud peal of thunder. the sound i heard was like that of harpists playing their harps.
scornful term of address for a woman.
"you see the people crowding against you," his disciples answered, "and yet you can ask, 'who touched me?' "
to lay in wait to ambush a person.
the person who danced to the kuglung instrument was turning from side to side as he/she was dancing.
the brightness of a glow is faint.
moreover, as you philippians know, in the early days of your acquaintance with the gospel, when i set out from macedonia, not one church shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving, except you only;
small hard red tree fruit used for decoration or spiritual purposes
completely
the owner of the camote field said, “i'm fencing these camotes of mine.”
to die; to kill
brothers, do not slander one another. anyone who speaks against his brother or judges him speaks against the law and judges it. when you judge the law, you are not keeping it, but sitting in judgment on it.
to be very hard
in him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, in accordance with the riches of god’s grace
lie on one’s back
to tell something to someone
then he touched their eyes and said, “according to your faith let it be done to you”;
jesus replied, “go back and report to john what you hear and see:  the blind receive sight, the lame walk, those who have leprosy are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the good news is proclaimed to the poor.  blessed is anyone who does not stumble on account of me.”
leader
personal case-marking particle oblique
i saw none of the other apostles—only james, the lord’s brother.
when a child walks as he/she is playing and lifts his other foot above his/her waist, [his/her] legs and thighs are also spread apart.
approximately
to spill out and scatter
giving thanks to the father, who has qualified you to share in the inheritance of the saints in the kingdom of light.
to shred abaca
something that is read, such as a book.
we know that we are children of god, and that the whole world is under the control of the evil one.
it’s your own fault
feed
he also said, "this is what the kingdom of god is like. a man scatters seed on the ground.
to utilize or apply the special secret knowledge to produce a cure
and if you do good to those who are good to you, what credit is that to you? even sinners do that.
it's like ann joy whose illness was difficult. we lost hope because she could no longer live.
both of you lift that which is heavy.
he replied, "as you enter the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. follow him to the house that he enters,
in damascus the governor under king aretas had the city of the damascenes guarded in order to arrest me.
therefore, brothers, since we have confidence to enter the most holy place by the blood of jesus,
for it seems to me that god has put us apostles on display at the end of the procession, like those condemned to die in the arena. we have been made a spectacle to the whole universe, to angels as well as to human beings.
there are pictures which we attach to the wall which is good to look at.
he fetched the saw and returned it to me.
wonder about
jew’s harp
the meaning of the sun going down is that it goes over the horizon. it goes out of sight
one strand
on the evening of that first day of the week, when the disciples were together, with the doors locked for fear of the jewish leaders, jesus came and stood among them and said, “peace be with you!”
wait or delay
it is shameful even to mention what the disobedient do in secret.
if it seems that one has not brushed one's teeth for several days, that's dirty-teeth.
“as the father has loved me, so have i loved you. now remain in my love.”
no manners
to come loose, be separated
small house lizard
for if god did not spare the natural branches, he will not spare you either.
he came to jesus at night and said, “rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from god. for no one could perform the signs you are doing if god were not with him.”
sew with long running stitches
own
sink
if the person's omen is bad, he will not proceed because he is being held back.
then he turned to his disciples and said privately, “blessed are the eyes that see what you see.
but the [motorboat] motor which i had brought was slow because it only had five horsepower.
bracelet
egg
jesus gave them this answer: “very truly i tell you, the son can do nothing by himself; he can do only what he sees his father doing, because whatever the father does the son also does.
to tantalize
kind of camote.
“i have spoken openly to the world,” jesus replied. “i always taught in synagogues or at the temple, where all the jews come together. i said nothing in secret.”
he makes provision to feed the cat.
emulate
he just [purposely] forgets it; he doesn't pay attention to it.
jesus' brothers said to him, "leave galilee and go to judea, so that your disciples there may see the works you do.
it drips through the pot.
love never fails. but where there are prophecies, they will cease; where there are tongues, they will be stilled; where there is knowledge, it will pass away.
serve food during mourning
the nose of the pig was flattened because it had bumped into a root.
sleek, as fur
living situation
they took soundings and found that the water was a hundred and twenty feet deep. a short time later they took soundings again and found it was ninety feet deep.
the ripening process is still incomplete.
immediately he spoke to them and said, "take courage! it is i. don't be afraid." then he climbed into the boat with them, and the wind died down. they were completely amazed,
to cross
not so with you. instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,
high note, brittle sound
weak
for i was hungry and you gave me nothing to eat, i was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink,
exercize self control.
to insult by pulling eyelids down
that which he blamed on (lit. caused to be attributed to) someone else, was done to cover up his fault.
but the pharisees said, “it is by the prince of demons that he drives out demons.”
then they went home and prepared spices and perfumes. but they rested on the sabbath in obedience to the commandment.
steam
if he condemned the cities of sodom and gomorrah by burning them to ashes, and made them an example of what is going to happen to the ungodly;
be angry
when two days of this process has been completed, finally that agkud can be eaten.
when the sun sets, it begins to become dark.
i vouch for him that he is working hard for you and for those at laodicea and hierapolis.
a woman of high status
so if god gave them the same gift he gave us who believed in the lord jesus christ, who was i to think that i could stand in god’s way?”
as for our bodies, the pain of tingling is like the pain of being repeatedly poked by needles.
you may be giving thanks well enough, but the other man is not edified.
don’t be in physical contact with me because you will catch my illness.
i hook them onto the basket rim
and they exceeded our expectations: they gave themselves first of all to the lord, and then by the will of god also to us.
for whoever wants to save their life will lose it, but whoever loses their life for me will save it.
house
all who sin apart from the law will also perish apart from the law, and all who sin under the law will be judged by the law.
jesus answered, “truly i tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times.”
move up
remember jesus christ, raised from the dead, descended from david. this is my gospel,
if your love does not change to another girl, then you have identified the girl with whom you had an agreement to be the one whom you would marry.
small goose
for christ did not enter a man-made sanctuary that was only a copy of the true one; he entered heaven itself, n
pale, anemic
sharpened stake which is used as a lever
someone asked him, "lord, are only a few people going to be saved?"
for we know that since christ was raised from the dead, he cannot die again; death no longer has mastery over him.
and this is the will of him who sent me, that i shall lose none of all that he has given me, but raise them up at the last day.
brought another tree with it when it fell
"i tell you, whoever acknowledges me before men, the son of man will also acknowledge him before the angels of god.
start plucking!
a hem
and when they had mocked him, they took off the purple robe and put his own clothes on him. then they led him out to crucify him.
our foot is lifted up as we take a step and then we step down.
even while the boy was coming, the demon threw him to the ground in a convulsion. but jesus rebuked the impure spirit, healed the boy and gave him back to his father.
if we have forgotten where something is, we keep searching as we look for it until we are able to find it.
so judas threw the money into the temple and left. then he went away and hanged himself.
stand up
he will not quarrel or cry out; no one will hear his voice in the streets.
buoyant
pardon
a river tributary of the liboganon
suck
a leaf chewed with betel nut
and you also were included in christ when you heard the message of truth, the gospel of your salvation. when you believed, you were marked in him with a seal, the promised holy spirit,
the first time that a person broke up the soil as he plowed his land, he had great difficulty doing the work.
escort this young man to the leader of the soldiers because he has something to tell him.
means of defense
after the people saw the miraculous sign that jesus did, they began to say, "surely this is the prophet who is to come into the world."
grace to all who love our lord jesus christ with an undying love.
we will hunker down if we hide.
consequently, whoever rebels against the authority is rebelling against what god has instituted, and those who do so will bring judgment on themselves.
that talk didn’t hit the mark.
and there was war in heaven. michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon and his angels fought back.
to cut wood into tiny slivers for starting a fire
and if a woman has a husband who is not a believer and he is willing to live with her, she must not divorce him.
we have this hope as an anchor for the soul, firm and secure. it enters the inner sanctuary behind the curtain,
pilate had a notice prepared and fastened to the cross. it read: jesus of nazareth, the king of the jews.
continue
the children will measure each other's stone's throw [to see] who can reach the other side [of the river with his stone].
finger-like appendage of a crab or shrimp
immediately, because herod did not give praise to god, an angel of the lord struck him down, and he was eaten by worms and died.
if it is the decision of the fathr and mother that you make them [part of] your family, they are no longer strangers; [they are] member(s) [of your family]
striped eel.
a red multicolored chicken went wild and changed into a wild chicken.
to stress or emphasize something spoken.
tornado
to poke or plant a stick firmly in the ground.
retrace steps
greet herodion, my relative. greet those in the household of narcissus who are in the lord.
a span of about two yards; from fingertip to fingertip; 4 dopas the unit of measure of material or beads
the disciples had forgotten to bring bread, except for one loaf they had with them in the boat.
salt
to be physically difficult (like digging hard soil)
anyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman commits adultery, and the man who marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
a groove or v-shaped notch as made in a felled or fallen palm tree trunk
in despair
this money is adequate for you to reach davao.
because of your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now,
david and goliath, they came at each other when they fought each other.
that he lavished on us. with all wisdom and understanding,
to believe in
cucumber.
are you thinking of killing me as you killed the egyptian yesterday?’
the chief of all of us.
disappointed
hard, firm (as rock or dry soil)
vulgar
if there is someone who has done wrong, if there is someone who requests mercy or forgiveness, it's not appropriate if his wrong doing is ignored. if you forgive him, [the fault] isn't being ignored.
i’m adding to my skirt.
as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without deeds is dead.
obey
capsize
‘the lord said to my lord: “sit at my right hand until i put your enemies under your feet.”’
blue or green
if we kill a horse, we give it a death blow on it's head with the back of an axe.
such regulations indeed have an appearance of wisdom, with their selfimposed worship, their false humility and their harsh treatment of the body, but they lack any value in restraining sensual indulgence.
a layer of something, such as an additional layer of clothing.
reflect on what i am saying, for the lord will give you insight into all this.
the scripture foresaw that god would justify the gentiles by faith, and announced the gospel in advance to abraham: "all nations will be blessed through you."
finally they said, “who are you? give us an answer to take back to those who sent us. what do you say about yourself?”
design; pattern including color.
and then what he will ask is, [whether] if he is able to borrow one thousand [pesos], if perhaps he will charge interest
now there was a pharisee, a man named nicodemus who was a member of the jewish ruling council.
for the wisdom of this world is foolishness in god's sight. as it is written: "he catches the wise in their craftiness" ;
crook one’s finger
just as you who were at one time disobedient to god have now received mercy as a result of their disobedience,
“this is my command: love each other.”
just as he was speaking, judas, one of the twelve, appeared. with him was a crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests, the teachers of the law, and the elders.
‘he will wipe every tear from their eyes. there will be no more death’ or mourning or crying or pain, for the old order of things has passed away.”
john’s disciples told him about all these things. calling two of them,
but i tell you, do not swear an oath at all: either by heaven, for it is god’s throne;  or by the earth, for it is his footstool; or by jerusalem, for it is the city of the great king.
to gamble with dice
give freely
struggle against restraint
filled with the fruit of righteousness that comes through jesus christ--to the glory and praise of god.
we’ll sink down in the soft beach.
tackle
then some stood up and gave this false testimony against him:
and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces of bread and fish.
term of address to a little girl.
rebuke her because she’s always visiting
i'll hurry to go to valencia because i will be benighted.
the son of mattathias, the son of amos, the son of nahum, the son of esli, the son of naggai,
then agrippa said to paul, “you have permission to speak for yourself.” so paul motioned with his hand and began his defense:
comb handle
then some of the believers who belonged to the party of the pharisees stood up and said, “the gentiles must be circumcised and required to keep the law of moses.”
kind of crayfish with big, long pinchers
begin
there was a person who lost two hundred pesos of his money. he came to an end of looking for it but didn't find it.
some distance from them a large herd of pigs was feeding.
therefore, if anyone is in christ, the new creation has come: the old has gone, the new is here!
then jesus said to the chief priests, the officers of the temple guard, and the elders, who had come for him, "am i leading a rebellion, that you have come with swords and clubs?
knowing it was out of envy that the chief priests had handed jesus over to him.
dear friend, i pray that you may enjoy good health and that all may go well with you, even as your soul is getting along well.
slightly unripe
what has happened to all your joy? i can testify that, if you could have done so, you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me.
try them on the children.
and out of the smoke locusts came down on the earth and were given power like that of scorpions of the earth.
so when you see standing in the holy place ‘the abomination that causes desolation,’ spoken of through the prophet daniel—let the reader understand—
nonpoisonous leaf used for putting on swellings and aches.
when they came up out of the water, the spirit of the lord suddenly took philip away, and the eunuch did not see him again, but went on his way rejoicing.
meanwhile, saul was still breathing out murderous threats against the lord’s disciples. he went to the high priest
his divine power has given us everything we need for a godly life through our knowledge of him who called us by his own glory and goodness.
[he] is rolling [his] eyes [up into his head]
abraham reasoned that god could raise the dead, and figuratively speaking, he did receive isaac back from death.
truly i tell you, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.
why? because i do not love you? god knows i do!
you will be told when [the grains] have filled out.
any fruit or vegetable blossom.
peter said, “explain the parable to us.”
and all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said to them.
fixed state
and you will receive a rich welcome into the eternal kingdom of our lord and savior jesus christ.
receive something
two hundred
but even if we or an angel from heaven should preach a gospel other than the one we preached to you, let them be under god’s curse!
intestinal worm of fish
the son of joanan, the son of rhesa, the son of zerubbabel, the son of shealtiel, the son of neri,
there are pictures which we attach to the wall which is good to look at.
when these things begin to take place, stand up and lift up your heads, because your redemption is drawing near."
ruin
“right then three men who had been sent to me from caesarea stopped at the house where i was staying.
“go,” he told him, “wash in the pool of siloam” (this word means “sent”). so the man went and washed, and came home seeing.
again i tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone who is rich to enter the kingdom of god.”
distracted
the holy spirit was showing by this that the way into the most holy place had not yet been disclosed as long as the first tabernacle was still standing.
the person who is a warrior is someone who has killed many people.
"righteous father, though the world does not know you, i know you, and they know that you have sent me.
he said to them, "this is what i told you while i was still with you: everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the law of moses, the prophets and the psalms."
so the churches were strengthened in the faith and grew daily in numbers.
if i must boast, i will boast of the things that show my weakness.
lightweight
and the news about him spread throughout the surrounding area.
they forbid people to marry and order them to abstain from certain foods, which god created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and who know the truth.
he had been instructed in the way of the lord, and he spoke with great fervor and taught about jesus accurately, though he knew only the baptism of john.
a week from today
inappropriate conduct
in this way, love is made complete among us so that we will have confidence on the day of judgment, because in this world we are like him.
excuse me
hole up (as in a stronghold)
the money earned from his bamboo was used up by the person whom he had entrusted
for i am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor demons, neither the present nor the future, nor any powers,
kind of sugarcane
get rid of all bitterness, rage and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice.
to help
remember those in prison as if you were their fellow prisoners, and those who are mistreated as if you yourselves were suffering.
philip went down to a city in samaria and proclaimed the messiah there.
but when he saw the wind, he was afraid and, beginning to sink, cried out, “lord, save me!”
for those who sleep, sleep at night, and those who get drunk, get drunk at night.
for in my inner being i delight in god’s law;
the person who felt badly because his child newly died, the next day he felt better and his thoughts cleared.
moan inarticulately
chopped
and when he had given thanks, he broke it and said, "this is my body, which is for you; do this in remembrance of me."
run out of something
the water is murky.
creep over ground, as sweet potatoes
the earthquake is strong.
surround
for i have not hesitated to proclaim to you the whole will of god.
platform above the hearth used for drying wood.
not that we are competent in ourselves to claim anything for ourselves, but our competence comes from god.
cook something with water
“how can this be?” nicodemus asked.
whoever is ashamed of me and my words, the son of man will be ashamed of them when he comes in his glory and in the glory of the father and of the holy angels.
there are splotches on the body of a child when he/she is two weeks old from the time of birth. they develop from his/her milk. the splotches just go away when he is older.
because our gospel came to you not simply with words but also with power, with the holy spirit and deep conviction. you know how we lived among you for your sake.
therefore, when christ came into the world, he said: "sacrifice and offering you did not desire, but a body you prepared for me;
go rather to the lost sheep of israel.
endless.
i am confident in the lord that you will take no other view. the one who is throwing you into confusion will pay the penalty, whoever he may be.
rise! let us go! here comes my betrayer!”
what a wretched man i am! who will rescue me from this body that is subject to death?
a kind of seasoned, slow-burning wood.
therefore, rid yourselves of all malice and all deceit, hypocrisy, envy, and slander of every kind.
the god of our ancestors raised jesus from the dead—whom you killed by hanging him on a cross.
ugly
"his master answered, 'you take charge of five cities.'
and if you lend to those from whom you expect repayment, what credit is that to you? even sinners lend to sinners, expecting to be repaid in full.
to taste
anyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman commits adultery, and the man who marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
eight
set out a fish trap
i have fought the good fight, i have finished the race, i have kept the faith.
for as in adam all die, so in christ all will be made alive.
be affected by an evil spirit
a kind of watermelon.
get out!
paul, silas and timothy, to the church of the thessalonians in god our father and the lord jesus christ:
they moved to maambago because they had made a new airstrip.
we touch the water with our finger [to see] whether the warmth is just right.
to die
as far as the gospel is concerned, they are enemies on your account; but as far as election is concerned, they are loved on account of the patriarchs,
peter asked, "lord, why can't i follow you now? i will lay down my life for you."
thin rocks; cement slabs
praise
who is the liar? it is the man who denies that jesus is the christ. such a man is the antichrist--he denies the father and the son.
to let or allow someone to do something.
when one of those at the table with him heard this, he said to jesus, "blessed is the man who will e
"i tell you the truth, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
a dove’s call behind one
to be crazy, demented
pinch and pull someone
threat
the fields are close to each other but there is a space between [them].
large, biting black ant
fifty
blue or green
in the same way, after the supper he took the cup, saying, "this cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you.
downriver
miniature house
"he was made king, however, and returned home. then he sent for the servants to whom he had given the money, in order to find out what they had gained with it.
when you ask, you do not receive, because you ask with wrong motives, that you may spend what you get on your pleasures.
be shy
such regulations indeed have an appearance of wisdom, with their selfimposed worship, their false humility and their harsh treatment of the body, but they lack any value in restraining sensual indulgence.
it is not to angels that he has subjected the world to come, about which we are speaking.
to obliterate
if we approach someone we are the ones to come close to him.
if we step on the ripe fruit of the papaya, it will be squashed.
their hair was messy from the rain.
there was a oerson who was attacked by his enemy and was unable to restrain himself from resisting/fighting back.
one person considers one day more sacred than another; another considers every day alike. each of them should be fully convinced in their own mind.
he came to derbe and then to lystra, where a disciple named timothy lived, whose mother was a jewess and a believer, but whose father was a greek.
but what did you go out to see? a prophet? yes, i tell you, and more than a prophet.
he took her by the hand and helped her to her feet. then he called the believers and the widows and presented her to them alive.
hop
for i do not want to see you now and make only a passing visit; i hope to spend some time with you, if the lord permits.
defecate
insist
we’re going to start harvesting rice today.
sleek, as fur
resemble or take after someone.
tremble as in a trance
he replied, “my mother and brothers are those who hear god’s word and put it into practice.”
a finger ring.
nails.
to act in a certain way
finger (person, crab, shrimp)
so jesus went with them. he was not far from the house when the centurion sent friends to say to him: “lord, don’t trouble yourself, for i do not deserve to have you come under my roof.
and soundness of speech that cannot be condemned, so that those who oppose you may be ashamed because they have nothing bad to say about us.
the next day he took out two denarii and gave them to the innkeeper. ‘look after him,’ he said, ‘and when i return, i will reimburse you for any extra expense you may have.’
their teaching will spread like gangrene. among them are hymenaeus and philetus,
the lord be with your spirit. grace be with you.
i’ve come in response to what you said, “you [come on] monday.”
“this perfume could have been sold at a high price and the money given to the poor.”
are we beginning to commend ourselves again? or do we need, like some people, letters of recommendation to you or from you?
he traveled through that area, speaking many words of encouragement to the people, and finally arrived in greece,
when it is becoming dawn, the wind is cold and we feel cold.
as it is, we are in danger of being charged with rioting because of today's events. in that case we would not be able to account for this commotion, since there is no reason for it."
to be in severe pain.
demetrius is well spoken of by everyone--and even by the truth itself. we also speak well of him, and you know that our testimony is true.
to be ambushed
a large poisonous black snake with a red tail.
and so you became a model to all the believers in macedonia and achaia.
to starve
seated in a window was a young man named eutychus, who was sinking into a deep sleep as paul talked on and on. when he was sound asleep, he fell to the ground from the third story and was picked up dead.
but when herod heard this, he said, "john, the man i beheaded, has been raised from the dead!"
trying to find out the time and circumstances to which the spirit of christ in them was pointing when he predicted the sufferings of christ and the glories that would follow.
then i saw another mighty angel coming down from heaven. he was robed in a cloud, with a rainbow above his head; his face was like the sun, and his legs were like fiery pillars.
name of high mountain range that separates tigwa from langilan.
may the grace of the lord jesus christ, and the love of god, and the fellowship of the holy spirit be with you all.
rattan trap for fox
love for someone
as for the manobo's cross-like symbol, it has two crosspieces of wood and is used to mark a field to be cut.
but the lord is faithful, and he will strengthen you and protect you from the evil one.
if we cross swift water, we have to step firmly when crossing because we will be pushed over as it is foaming.
grace and peace to you from god our father and the lord jesus christ,
paul answered, "i am a jew, from tarsus in cilicia, a citizen of no ordinary city. please let me speak to the people."
and to offer a sacrifice in keeping with what is said in the law of the lord: “a pair of doves or two young pigeons.”
the devil led him to jerusalem and had him stand on the highest point of the temple. “if you are the son of god,” he said, “throw yourself down from here.  for it is written: ‘he will command his angels concerning you to guard you carefully;
when you lay down, lay your head here.
this is the one who came by water and blood--jesus christ. he did not come by water only, but by water and blood. and it is the spirit who testifies, because the spirit is the truth.
to curse
if he knew that i was having a hard time, he would reduce [the amount] which he would have me pay back.
he answered, “the one who sowed the good seed is the son of man.
they band together to attack a certain house.as for that raiding, there are very many who will come against those enemies of theirs.
lugtom has the older-younger sibling relationship with gibangon.
i was embraced.
then their eyes were opened and they recognized him, and he disappeared from their sight.
at the time when the rice was harvested, they shared with those who, in contrast to others, didn't have anything to harvest, and so all the people were able to eat.
the twelve gates were twelve pearls, each gate made of a single pearl. the great street of the city was of pure gold, like transparent glass.
anyone who speaks in a tongue edifies themselves, but the one who prophesies edifies the church.
when she poured this perfume on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.
it was kept a secret from us.
root; getting roots
greet asyncritus, phlegon, hermes, patrobas, hermas and the brothers with them.
we didn’t know.
we ought therefore to show hospitality to such men so that we may work together for the truth.
run, run away
how, then, can they call on the one they have not believed in? and how can they believe in the one of whom they have not heard? and how can they hear without someone preaching to them?
a pussy, open ulcer-like sore typically with raised edges, especially of a tropical ulcer on the skin.
if the vine wound around the tree, it wrapped around it.
people who have talabubung familiar spirits anticipate that they will be transported to heaven.
so then, no more boasting about men! all things are yours,
no, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
mane (as of horse or goat)
slaves, obey your earthly masters in everything; and do it, not only when their eye is on you and to win their favor, but with sincerity of heart and reverence for the lord.
the woman removed her laundry when she collected it.
halfway.
disagreement
toenail
he replied, “go into the city to a certain man and tell him, ‘the teacher says: my appointed time is near. i am going to celebrate the passover with my disciples at your house.’”
blessed and holy are those who have part in the first resurrection. the second death has no power over them, but they will be priests of god and of christ and will reign with him for a thousand years.
and after she had said this, she went back and called her sister mary aside. "the teacher is here," she said, "and is asking for you."
a kind of fruit.
quick-burning
to be strong, or forceful, as an earthquake or an ocean wave.
grooved (as of fruit)
then jesus was led by the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
and levi got up, left everything and followed him.
greet all the saints in christ jesus. the brothers who are with me send greetings.
this is my defense to those who sit in judgment on me.
if something heavy is put on the raft, it will be weighted down and then it will sink.
in everything i did, i showed you that by this kind of hard work we must help the weak, remembering the words the lord jesus himself said: 'it is more blessed to give than to receive.' "
do something carefully.
but i ask: did they not hear? of course they did: “their voice has gone out into all the earth, their words to the ends of the world.”
a forest plant used as a treatment for blighted fields when burned
important
i have labored and toiled and have often gone without sleep; i have known hunger and thirst and have often gone without food; i have been cold and naked.
to disturb or butt up against something
to have formed a scar.
may the lord direct your hearts into god’s love and christ’s perseverance.
a felled tree; log.
warning of death by two simultaneous dove calls
“but the man who was mistreating the other pushed moses aside and said, ‘who made you ruler and judge over us?
to testify
come down from the cross and save yourself!"
the next day we set sail from there and arrived off kios. the day after that we crossed over to samos, and on the following day arrived at miletus.
twist and turn in road
wild
“but what about you?” he asked. “who do you say i am?”
arrive at a destination
dark
if we accidently smear soot on ourselves, our bodies and our clothes will become black.
one who engages in necromancy
and with your feet fitted with the readiness that comes from the gospel of peace.
predict
for he will be great in the sight of the lord. he is never to take wine or other fermented drink, and he will be filled with the holy spirit even before he is born.
remove clothing; go naked
increase
then the governor’s soldiers took jesus into the praetorium and gathered the whole company of soldiers around him.
celebration
"we are going up to jerusalem," he said, "and the son of man will be betrayed to the chief priests and teachers of the law. they will condemn him to death and will hand him over to the gentiles,
if you can manage [to heal] my body which has sores, remove them so that it will become well.
we have spoken freely to you, corinthians, and opened wide our hearts to you.
fine bits of metal
for the lamb at the center of the throne will be their shepherd; he will lead them to springs of living water. and god will wipe away every tear from their eyes."
slice into long thin pieces
because it is consecrated by the word of god and prayer.
the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are ceremonially unclean sanctify them so that they are outwardly clean.
when the pharisees saw this, they said to him, “look! your disciples are doing what is unlawful on the sabbath.”
when the corn is still unripe, we harvest enough individual plants to cook.
the child was made to stop his playing.
wrinkle in skin
a person who has chills feels cold because they have malaria.
jesus then took the loaves, gave thanks, and distributed to those who were seated as much as they wanted. he did the same with the fish.
enclose
face
the spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are god’s children.
they have become filled with every kind of wickedness, evil, greed and depravity. they are full of envy, murder, strife, deceit and malice. they are gossips,
solomon the father of rehoboam, rehoboam the father of abijah, abijah the father of asa,
just one person to ascend at a time.
a multiple-pronged spear; to produce shoots (as young rice).
parent-in-law or in-law relatives
nickname
whoever has ears, let them hear what the spirit says to the churches. to the one who is victorious, i will give some of the hidden manna. i will also give that person a white stone with a new name written on it, known only to the one who receives it.
if there is a person who has experienced the death [of a loved one], we offer emotional comfort that we should strengthen ourselves against the emotional pain.
borrow someone's land
he/she is experiencing malaria.
and they sang a new song: "you are worthy to take the scroll and to open its seals, because you were slain, and with your blood you purchased men for god from every tribe and language and people and nation.
taking him by the right hand, he helped him up, and instantly the man’s feet and ankles became strong.
ignoring what they said, jesus told the synagogue ruler, "don't be afraid; just believe."
jesus went on to say, “in a little while you will see me no more, and then after a little while you will see me.”
i showed him a portion of secondary forest which to cut.
through him all things were made; without him nothing was made that has been made.
if anyone does not provide for his relatives, and especially for his immediate family, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever
then jesus said to them, "how is it that they say the christ is the son of david?
always, continually
that person who diligently trains will become skilled.
at daybreak jesus went out to a solitary place. the people were looking for him and when they came to where he was, they tried to keep him from leaving them.
retrace steps
the holy spirit was showing by this that the way into the most holy place had not yet been disclosed as long as the first tabernacle was still standing.
for macedonia and achaia were pleased to make a contribution for the poor among the saints in jerusalem.
two people to move very close to each other
gluttonous
help each other
"if, while we seek to be justified in christ, it becomes evident that we ourselves are sinners, does that mean that christ promotes sin? absolutely not!
this is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
dove
dear children, let us not love with words or tongue but with actions and in truth.
chickenpox.
the child's legs were spread apart as he/she was sitting.
there are some who scold only with their mouth(s). there are those who strike when they get after [someone].
pervasive sound
for the third time he spoke to them: "why? what crime has this man committed? i have found in him no grounds for the death penalty. therefore i will have him punished and then release him."
you disowned the holy and righteous one and asked that a murderer be released to you.
fruit of a vine used to poison fish
listen
for this reason they tried all the more to kill him; not only was he breaking the sabbath, but he was even calling god his own father, making himself equal with god.
cook something with water
clear throat
it was mary magdalene, joanna, mary the mother of james, and the others with them who told this to the apostles.
weeds
a village on the liboganon river just north of the mouth of the kapugi river.
the third angel sounded his trumpet, and a great star, blazing like a torch, fell from the sky on a third of the rivers and on the springs of water—
grace and peace to you from god our father and the lord jesus christ.
tongs
approximately
i have great confidence in you; i take great pride in you. i am greatly encouraged; in all our troubles my joy knows no bounds.
we sway back and forth when walking.
and that they will come to their senses and escape from the trap of the devil, who has taken them captive to do his will.
do not be deceived: god cannot be mocked. a man reaps what he sows.
they got up and returned at once to jerusalem. there they found the eleven 1567 and those with them, assembled together
then we will no longer be infants, tossed back and forth by the waves, and blown here and there by every wind of teaching and by the cunning and craftiness of people in their deceitful scheming.
limp
the devil led him to jerusalem and had him stand on the highest point of the temple. “if you are the son of god,” he said, “throw yourself down from here.  for it is written: ‘he will command his angels concerning you to guard you carefully;
and the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of god and from his power, and no one could enter the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed.
but instead, one brother takes another to court—and this in front of unbelievers!
the eggs have fully developed when [the chicks] hatch.
then jesus asked them, "which is lawful on the sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill?" but they remained silent.
the armies of heaven were following him, riding on white horses and dressed in fine linen, white and clean.
guard
for a noose to tighten on the neck of a bird or other animal
dry season
sound of a human or animal voice
he exercised all the authority of the first beast on his behalf, and made the earth and its inhabitants worship the first beast, whose fatal wound had been healed.
for christ did not enter a man-made sanctuary that was only a copy of the true one; he entered heaven itself, n
if your brother or sister sins, go and point out their fault, just between the two of you. if they listen to you, you have won them over.
again jesus said, “simon son of john, do you love me?” he answered, “yes, lord, you know that i love you.” jesus said, “take care of my sheep.”
turn
you’ve arrived too late, for we’ve already eaten.
two rebels were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left.
if we inadvertently brush against the table as we pass, it is jostled because it was moved
rush
slippery
wives, submit to your husbands as to the lord.
the man left his wife and four children. and now, he has abandoned his wife and children
thresh grains or beans by trampling
take along
and the smoke of their torment rises for ever and ever. there is no rest day or night for those who worship the beast and his image, or for anyone who receives the mark of his name."
if there is a jeep which is broken down which needs to be taken to a shop for repair, they also have it towed by another jeep.
the edge of the river which is flat in which reeds grow, that is soft soil ground.
let us hold unswervingly to the hope we profess, for he who promised is faithful.
jesus answered, "i tell you the truth, you are looking for me, not because you saw miraculous signs but because you ate the loaves and had your fill.
i am the alpha and the omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.
stay there, eating and drinking whatever they give you, for the worker deserves his wages. do not move around from house to house.
abrade
see
but seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well.
get repeatedly or thoroughly lost
they requested festus, as a favor to them, to have paul transferred to jerusalem, for they were preparing an ambush to kill him along the way.
"when someone invites you to a wedding feast, do not take the place of honor, for a person more distinguished than you may have been invited.
annas the high priest was there, and so were caiaphas, john, alexander and others of the high priest’s family.
the king was enraged. he sent his army and destroyed those murderers and burned their city.
“the spirit of the lord is on me, because he has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. he has sent me to proclaim freedom for the prisoners and recovery of sight for the blind, to set the oppressed free,
to be angry or bitter towards someone; to hate
as soon as judas took the bread, satan entered into him.
don’t be in physical contact with me because you will catch my illness.
always
a person who has caught a pig delivers a forkful to each house.
when the islanders saw the snake hanging from his hand, they said to each other, “this man must be a murderer; for though he escaped from the sea, the goddess justice has not allowed him to live.”
sacrifice chickens before cutting rice fields for a successful harvest
die
but when they believed philip as he proclaimed the good news of the kingdom of god and the name of jesus christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
pray that this will not take place in winter,
pick
the guns  were taken as spoils.
tenth
something taking a long time
to make something happen
long ago, our bodies were [formed of] fingernail.
a sticker such as a burr; something that sticks, such as adhesive tape
after six days jesus took peter, james and john with him and led them up a high mountain, where they were all alone. there he was transfigured before them.
bathe oneself
they gave him a piece of broiled fish,
expression of regret.
“why? what crime has he committed?” asked pilate. but they shouted all the louder, “crucify him!”
we cause [people] to hear what we have to say.
the son of man will go just as it is written about him. but woe to that man who betrays the son of man! it would be better for him if he had not been born.”
do your best to come to me quickly,
the flood of the liboganon will come right up to us.
lame, crippled in the legs
to the only wise god be glory forever through jesus christ! amen.
loan
all the saints send their greetings.
him who overcomes i will make a pillar in the temple of my god. never again will he leave it. i will write on him the name of my god and the name of the city of my god, the new jerusalem, which is coming down out of heaven from my god; and i will also write on him my new name.
and now you know what is holding him back, so that he may be revealed at the proper time.
now while he was in jerusalem at the passover festival, many people saw the signs he was performing and believed in his name.
if there is someone who smokes, [and] if the end [of the cigarette] becomes burnt, its ashes will drop off.
he then began to speak to them in parables: "a man planted a vineyard. he put a wall around it, dug a pit for the winepress and built a watchtower. then he rented the vineyard to some farmers and went away on a journey.
“very truly i tell you, whoever believes in me will do the works i have been doing, and they will do even greater things than these, because i am going to the father.”
paul and his companions traveled throughout the region of phrygia and galatia, having been kept by the holy spirit from preaching the word in the province of asia.
"beware of the teachers of the law. they like to walk around in flowing robes and love to be greeted in the marketplaces and have the most important seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets.
briefly or superficially
he won't be able to go down-river because he had work to do.
moth ball
a canaanite woman from that vicinity came to him, crying out, “lord, son of david, have mercy on me! my daughter is demon-possessed and suffering terribly.”
perspiration
and when the south wind blows, you say, 'it's going to be hot,' and it is.
the wind is getting stronger.
once more he visited cana in galilee, where he had turned the water into wine. and there was a certain royal official whose son lay sick at capernaum.
for i myself am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. i tell this one, ‘go,’ and he goes; and that one, ‘come,’ and he comes. i say to my servant, ‘do this,’ and he does it.”
the second
the vine is used for ???
the next day the rulers, the elders and the teachers of the law met in jerusalem.
to be kept secret from someone
we happened to have propagated another kind of rat.
fast.
since what may be known about god is plain to them, because god has made it plain to them.
if you are insulted because of the name of christ, you are blessed, for the spirit of glory and of god rests on you.
to sag under a weight, such as a floor or soft wood
to block as an inlet from a river to drain area and catch fish in traps
‘no,’ he answered, ‘because while you are pulling the weeds, you may uproot the wheat with them.
there is something which they burn as a means of treatment to remove that love charm.
throw away
we look someone up and down. we look at them from top to bottom or bottom to top.
i have great confidence in you; i take great pride in you. i am greatly encouraged; in all our troubles my joy knows no bounds.
cough
to become weak or discouraged
all of us also lived among them at one time, gratifying the cravings of our flesh and following its desires and thoughts. like the rest, we were by nature deserving of wrath.
shake water from hands.
built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with christ jesus himself as the chief cornerstone.
turn or twist something, as a knob or lid
fish traps are aited with camote
in him was life, and that life was the light of all mankind.
slaves, obey your earthly masters with respect and fear, and with sincerity of heart, just as you would obey christ.
when a table is bumped, the glasses which were on the table will tip over and fall.
but they will have to give account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.
slap one's own head
cause to happen.
and they crucified him. dividing up his clothes, they cast lots to see what each would get.
be ticklish
there was a woman who gathered her laundry together and wrapped it in a blanket.
since you know that you will receive an inheritance from the lord as a reward. it is the lord christ you are serving.
descend to the river from the mountains.
the trees are sawn in portions to be sent downriver.
therefore do not be partners with them.
powerful due to wealth or status
weave walls of bamboo.
“if you keep my commands, you will remain in my love, just as i have kept my father’s commands and remain in his love.”
if they had been thinking of the country they had left, they would have had opportunity to return.
and that is what some of you were. but you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the lord jesus christ and by the spirit of our god.
to accidentally ram into something
sarong, skirt
my brothers, as believers in our glorious lord jesus christ, don't show favoritism.
deliver it quickly. we rush the delivery of something (cause the delivery to be quick).
and do not think you can say to yourselves, ‘we have abraham as our father.’ i tell you that out of these stones god can raise up children for abraham.
when we have discovered the date which is open, we set that day for gathering together.
kidney.
now learn this lesson from the fig tree: as soon as its twigs get tender and its leaves come out, you know that summer is near.
jesus entered jericho and was passing through.
the sun gives brilliance to the light.
the small fishhook will be baited with an earthworm.
to deviate.
remember
it took my place
finally, let no one cause me trouble, for i bear on my body the marks of jesus.
but if there is a means of defense, we who are living there won't feel insecure because our living situation will be secure.
i came from the father and entered the world; now i am leaving the world and going back to the father."
when we give a warning signal, we pay attention to whether there are people; those are the ones suspected to be raiders stepping on sticks. we say, "rrrrr".
to be operated on
sheathe your bolo.
small bird such as a rice bird
which
niya is of great value to me because he is the one to whom i am able to entrust [with my field work].
see, i have told you ahead of time.
meanwhile we groan, longing to be clothed instead with our heavenly dwelling,
if we have a companion who has conduct which cannot be changed, we give up on teaching him to do good.
as for the liboganon river, the reed there are thick in the flat area and its body is hard.
sound of a human or animal voice
ear of corn
ve found you out.“what is your secret about me?”
the bolo is behind me.
saul cast a knife/sword at david but it just happened to lbecome lodged in the wall.
just as bad
whoever tries to keep their life will lose it, and whoever loses their life will preserve it.
will he thank the servant because he did what he was told to do?
regarding his son, who as to his earthly life was a descendant of david,
as you know, it was because of an illness that i first preached the gospel to you,
take something. choose that which you are hungry for.
so he got up, took the child and his mother during the night and left for egypt,
only one member of a pair of objects
do not boast over those branches. if you do, consider this: you do not support the root, but the root supports you.
smooth
when mary reached the place where jesus was and saw him, she fell at his feet and said, "lord, if you had been here, my brother would not have died."
cross ankles
when ghosts try to scare us, at first they say, "mmm." after that, they make things drop in front of us.
he will continuously discuss it with the father of the girl until he agrees.
do not judge, or you too will be judged.
tornado
then the disciples came to jesus in private and asked, “why couldn’t we drive it out?”
if one of our companions has a debt which [he/she] doesn't pay, we jog his/her memory by asking.
i will return soon
"suppose one of you wants to build a tower. will he not first sit down and estimate the cost to see if he has enough money to complete it?
to cut grass, clear ground of weeds.
to be excited as someone about to ride in an airplane for the first time
and jacob the father of joseph, the husband of mary, and mary was the mother of jesus who is called the messiah.
our agreement in advance was that whoever has stamina to come along, he/she will be chosen.
but his mother spoke up and said, “no! he is to be called john.”
across, other side, esp. of water
at once they left their nets and followed him.
david himself declares in the book of psalms: " 'the lord said to my lord: "sit at my right hand
good for making lumber
there is a child whose teeth are far apart. his teeth have open spaces between them.
he is staying with simon the tanner, whose house is by the sea.”
“blessed are those whose transgressions are forgiven, whose sins are covered.
graze, as spear or bullet
but you do not believe because you are not my sheep.
to the rest i say this (i, not the lord): if any brother has a wife who is not a believer and she is willing to live with him, he must not divorce her.
later, joseph of arimathea asked pilate for the body of jesus. now joseph was a disciple of jesus, but secretly because he feared the jews. with pilate's permission, he came and took the body away.
star
after this i heard what sounded like the roar of a great multitude in heaven shouting: “hallelujah! salvation and glory and power belong to our god,
[as for] the person who is making a house, he works hard to finish making it because he will move in.
evil spirit
and he was in the desert forty days, being tempted by satan. he was with the wild animals, and angels attended him.
to proclaim the year of the lord’s favor.”
father, glorify your name!"
in addition to all this, take up the shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one.
“they are not of the world, even as i am not of it.”
for example, if someone is getting married, the only thing they will be discussing is how much brideprice they will give up front for that girl.
what do you think?” “he is worthy of death,” they answered.
sleep on the ground; pay attention
a rattan woven basket
then he said to his disciples, “the harvest is plentiful but the workers are few.
not only so, but we also glory in our sufferings, because we know that suffering produces perseverance;
pray
labor pains
so jesus went with him.
in other words, it is not the children by physical descent who are god’s children, but it is the children of the promise who are regarded as abraham’s offspring.
if a man cleanses himself from the latter, he will be an instrument for noble purposes, made holy, useful to the master and prepared to do any good work.
when they arrived, they went upstairs to the room where they were staying. those present were peter, john, james and andrew; philip and thomas, bartholomew and matthew; james son of alphaeus and simon the zealot, and judas son of james.
but jesus made no reply, not even to a single charge—to the great amazement of the governor.
one of you will say to me: “then why does god still blame us? for who is able to resist his will?”
to swim overhand; to wave arms around
by faith moses' parents hid him for three months after he was born, because they saw he was no ordinary child, and they were not afraid of the king's edict.
and they stayed continually at the temple, praising god.
then jacob went down to egypt, where he and our ancestors died.
when he learned from the centurion that it was so, he gave the body to joseph.
"there will be weeping there, and gnashing of teeth, when you see abraham, isaac and jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of god, but you yourselves thrown out.
a kind of nightbird
but if you show favoritism, you sin and are convicted by the law as lawbreakers.
then i heard the number of those who were sealed: 144,000 from all the tribes of israel.
then the woman, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell at his feet and, trembling with fear, told him the whole truth.
nipa palm before it is cut
jesus answered, "do you think that these galileans were worse sinners than all the other galileans because they suffered this way?
and when i was with you and needed something, i was not a burden to anyone, for the brothers who came from macedonia supplied what i needed. i have kept myself from being a burden to you in any way, and will continue to do so.
the big lizard replaced the eggs of the small lizard with her own.
he said to me: “it is done. i am the alpha and the omega, the beginning and the end. to the thirsty i will give water without cost from the spring of the water of life.
(for the fruit of the light consists in all goodness, righteousness and truth)
denim is sturdy.
hired hand for taking harvest downriver by raft
a span of about two yards; from fingertip to fingertip; 4 dopas the unit of measure of material or beads
for god, who said, “let light shine out of darkness,” made his light shine in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of god’s glory displayed in the face of christ.
he will oppose and will exalt himself over everything that is called god or is worshiped, so that he sets himself up in god’s temple, proclaiming himself to be god.
then he told her, "for such a reply, you may go; the demon has left your daughter."
all things have been committed to me by my father. no one knows the son except the father, and no one knows the father except the son and those to whom the son chooses to reveal him.
two other men, both criminals, were also led out with him to be executed.
generic term for any bird related to the hawk or eagle which preys on chickens, snakes or other small birds or animals.
as he walked along, he saw levi son of alphaeus sitting at the tax collector's booth. "follow me," jesus told him, and levi got up and followed him.
acquainted
peter and the other apostles replied: “we must obey god rather than human beings!
blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see god.
the meaning of the sun going down is that it goes over the horizon. it goes out of sight.
today in the town of david a savior has been born to you; he is the messiah, the lord.
own
the owner’s servants came to him and said, ‘sir, didn’t you sow good seed in your field? where then did the weeds come from?’
the person who hides a fault transfers the blame to someone else.
to do something slowly
met
the other person was defeated because he picked lansones.
now thomas (called didymus), one of the twelve, was not with the disciples when jesus came.
small edible fresh water shell fish.
once again jesus went out beside the lake. a large crowd came to him, and he began to teach them.
for which i am an ambassador in chains. pray that i may declare it fearlessly, as i should.
a bird hops when it steps with both feet as it moves around.
slow.
don’t give the clothing out on credit.
we fit the lid on the shaft  of the ballpen.
they were unable to trap him in what he had said there in public. and astonished by his answer, they became silent.
if we have sown spiritual seed among you, is it too much if we reap a material harvest from you?
now it was the governor’s custom at the festival to release a prisoner chosen by the crowd.
seated in a window was a young man named eutychus, who was sinking into a deep sleep as paul talked on and on. when he was sound asleep, he fell to the ground from the third story and was picked up dead.
brother will betray brother to death, and a father his child; children will rebel against their parents and have them put to death.
last of all, he sent his son to them. ‘they will respect my son,’ he said.
as for the sight of my eyes, i cannot see clearly.
them
hold
if that is how god clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, will he not much more clothe you—you of little faith?
do not give dogs what is sacred; do not throw your pearls to pigs. if you do, they may trample them under their feet, and then turn and tear you to pieces.
if an illness comes to some place, [and] if someone visits from that place, the illness will be transmitted to us.
branch of a tree;
to dance a baby by its hands
long hair at neck
and he has given him authority to judge because he is the son of man.
completely burn a field
since you know that you will receive an inheritance from the lord as a reward. it is the lord christ you are serving.
and pray for us, too, that god may open a door for our message, so that we may proclaim the mystery of christ, for which i am in chains.
for this reason, and because of the angels, the woman ought to have a sign of authority on her head.
the host hurried to meet the guest who arrived at his house and he welcomed and gathered information from him as they talked with one another.
a person asked for the tip(s) of the camote [leaves] and he cut off the tip(s) of the red pepper [leaves].
now that same day two of them were going to a village called emmaus, about seven miles from jerusalem.
now there were some greeks among those who went up to worship at the festival.
and if the ear should say, "because i am not an eye, i do not belong to the body," it would not for that reason cease to be part of the body.
young featherless chicken slow to grow feathers
the beast was given a mouth to utter proud words and blasphemies and to exercise its authority for forty-two months.
sea; ocean
joke
give all
circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing. keeping god’s commands is what counts.
that which erases the footprints is the rain.
no matter what i do to boost [my] strength, i just continue to feel weak.
because he almost died for the work of christ, risking his life to make up for the help you could not give me.
angry, upset, moody, or depressed
return, turn back
shouldn’t you have had mercy on your fellow servant just as i had on you?’
sticky tree fruit
he was chosen before the creation of the world, but was revealed in these last times for your sake.
he said to another man, "follow me." but the man replied, "lord, first let me go and bury my father."
lydda was near joppa; so when the disciples heard that peter was in lydda, they sent two men to him and urged him, “please come at once!”
to leave something behind for someone, such as food for a child
with many similar parables jesus spoke the word to them, as much as they could understand.
they told him, “jesus of nazareth is passing by.”
to those who by persistence in doing good seek glory, honor and immortality, he will give eternal life.
frustrated
to be sighted, as with a gun or binoculars.
to be out of control, compulsive behavior
to crack
“you unbelieving and perverse generation,” jesus replied, “how long shall i stay with you? how long shall i put up with you? bring the boy here to me.”
but john tried to deter him, saying, “i need to be baptized by you, and do you come to me?”
you are able to believe something when you know about it.
it contained all kinds of four-footed animals, as well as reptiles and birds.
after jesus was born in bethlehem in judea, during the time of king herod, magi from the east came to jerusalem.
"therefore keep watch because you do not know when the owner of the house will come back--whether in the evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows, or at dawn.
large camote with pinkish-yellow skin
i sent you to reap what you have not worked for. others have done the hard work, and you have reaped the benefits of their labor.”
tiba-an ogbukusi ka lison.both her legs are enveloped.
then jesus told his disciples a parable to show them that they should always pray and not give up.
a place in kapugi
solid, durable
“very truly i tell you, whoever hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life and will not be judged but has crossed over from death to life.
glint of reflected light, as from gold or gems
sit cross-legged
ransom
have pity on
to squirm (like worms)
seeing in the distance a fig tree in leaf, he went to find out if it had any fruit. when he reached it, he found nothing but leaves, because it was not the season for figs.
then the king told the attendants, ‘tie him hand and foot, and throw him outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
in the sixth month of elizabeth’s pregnancy, god sent the angel gabriel to nazareth, a town in galilee,
it’s good that we’ve found some companions.
you (2nd person plural, topic pronoun)
for he longs for all of you and is distressed because you heard he was ill.
brothers and sisters, let me take an example from everyday life. just as no one can set aside or add to a human covenant that has been duly established, so it is in this case.
the person said, “about the debt of the kapugi people, it was a long time ago.”
the beast was given a mouth to utter proud words and blasphemies and to exercise its authority for forty-two months.
metal band on knife or bolo handle.
those who had arrested jesus took him to caiaphas the high priest, where the teachers of the law and the elders had assembled.
white breasted dove with red head.
"blessed is the coming kingdom of our father david!" "hosanna in the highest!"
peer
become smaller, wide apart, smashed, dispersed, shrink
a person who is a slave, he is a servant who is made to suffer by his leader [who gives him] lots of work.
i remember that which my father taught me about the work of sawing wood to make a house.
name of village tied to spear legend
to go hunting with a gun or other weapon
the jews pushed alexander to the front, and some of the crowd shouted instructions to him. he motioned for silence in order to make a defense before the people.
benita was a childbride.
sleep
therefore, my brothers, be eager to prophesy, and do not forbid speaking in tongues.
when the disciples james and john saw this, they asked, "lord, do you want 1531 us to call fire down from heaven to destroy them ?"
there are different kinds of service, but the same lord.
"why do you call me good?" jesus answered. "no one is good--except god alone.
we release [her] with [an item of] clothing to resume normal activity.
to pull back and inside, as head of a turtle.
because herod feared john and protected him, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man. when herod heard john, he was greatly puzzled ; yet he liked to listen to him.
value
people have kidney(s) in their body(s).
to commit incest.
to be chased by an animal (horse or pig) intent on biting
to widen, press apart
then he said to them all: “whoever wants to be my disciple must deny themselves and take up their cross daily and follow me.
if there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
fit together
no one has seen the father except the one who is from god; only he has seen the father.
harvest
the islanders showed us unusual kindness. they built a fire and welcomed us all because it was raining and cold.
give to the one who asks you, and do not turn away from the one who wants to borrow from you.
the person straightened his arrows because they were bent.
philip and bartholomew; thomas and matthew the tax collector; james son of alphaeus, and thaddaeus;
paper wasp.
for the mighty one has done great things for me—holy is his name.
shy
seat
children, obey your parents in everything, for this pleases the lord.
to some who were confident of their own righteousness and looked down on everyone else, jesus told this parable:
therefore no one will be declared righteous in god’s sight by the works of the law; rather, through the law we become conscious of our sin.
i can't carry that heavy burden. (or "i cannot solve that difficult problem.")
my skin has been abrazed.
if our blood is lacking we will be lightheaded when we walk and we won't be able to manage well to get around.
i was a stranger and you did not invite me in, i needed clothes and you did not clothe me, i was sick and in prison and you did not look after me.’
then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the palace of the high priest, whose name was caiaphas,
small honey bee that makes its nest in a hole in a tree
grown up
simon himself believed and was baptized. and he followed philip everywhere, astonished by the great signs and miracles he saw.
therefore, since we have such a hope, we are very bold.
younger sibling
juice or sap of vegetables and fruits
undergo a trial to prove oneself innocent of an accusation
i had not expected that i would be able to teach the father and the daughter (lit. offspring).
wait expectantly
make something wet
wade through
paul and timothy, servants of christ jesus, to all the saints in christ jesus at philippi, together with the overseers and deacons:
round reddish-brown seed of a vine
large python
large earthworm eaten by wild pigs
tirino said, “those who don't feel unsafe, don't leave kapugi. if [you] feel unsafe, leave together now for maambao because there are warning of raiders for a while.”
your other younger sibling.
but some of them said, "could not he who opened the eyes of the blind man have kept this man from dying?"
chew meat from bone
behind
there was a oerson who was attacked by his enemy and was unable to restrain himself from resisting/fighting back.
he replied, “because you have so little faith. truly i tell you, if you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mountain, ‘move from here to there,’ and it will move. nothing will be impossible for you.”
the workers who were hired about five in the afternoon came and each received a denarius.
‘i am the god of abraham, the god of isaac, and the god of jacob’? he is not the god of the dead but of the living.”
large land snail
walk single file
at that, the captain went with his officers and brought the apostles. they did not use force, because they feared that the people would stone them.
center post of a house
look down
because herod feared john and protected him, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man. when herod heard john, he was greatly puzzled ; yet he liked to listen to him.
as for people who swim underwater, [they] hold their breath as they swim underwater looking for fish.
i glanced at out of the corner of  [my] eye.
cluster
slide deliberately, as down a pole
but if they will not listen, take one or two others along, so that ‘every matter may be established by the testimony of two or three witnesses.’
commend someone on their good behavior.
body, whole body
nothing is missing
so too, at the present time there is a remnant chosen by grace.
the child won't obey.
dry meat or fruit
go over there.
now that you have tasted that the lord is good.
"for who has known the mind of the lord that he may instruct him?" but we have the mind of christ.
you sleep first
and we know that in all things god works for the good of those who love him, who have been called according to his purpose.
universe
be greedy
mother is frustrated because she has a lot of rice to weed. she says her rice will be wasted if she cannot finish weeding.
to this he replied: “brothers and fathers, listen to me! the god of glory appeared to our father abraham while he was still in mesopotamia, before he lived in harran.
to our god and father be glory for ever and ever. amen.
cowardly person
persecutions, sufferings--what kinds of things happened to me in antioch, iconium and lystra, the persecutions i endured. yet the lord rescued me from all of them.
if our teeth are touching each other, it is difficult to remove the particles of food between the teeth.
to ball up something, as mud
a lizard about 5 or 6 inches long which has a green back, light colored belly and brown tail.
but i see another law at work in me, waging war against the law of my mind and making me a prisoner of the law of sin at work within me.
we who are strong ought to bear with the failings of the weak and not to please ourselves.
quick-burning
that god was reconciling the world to himself in christ, not counting people’s sins against them. and he has committed to us the message of reconciliation.
meet
slim, having a narrow waist
are we trying to arouse the lord's jealousy? are we stronger than he?
vomit
jesus replied, “let it be so now; it is proper for us to do this to fulfill all righteousness.” then john consented.
tiny lizard
this is the promise our twelve tribes are hoping to see fulfilled as they earnestly serve god day and night. king agrippa, it is because of this hope that these jews are accusing me.
jesus said to them, “truly i tell you, at the renewal of all things, when the son of man sits on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of israel.
get out every last weed lest it go to weed. if the rest of the weeds aren’t pulled up, they’ll grow up tall.
paul entered the synagogue and spoke boldly there for three months, arguing persuasively about the kingdom of god.
finish a discussion.
peter followed him at a distance, right into the courtyard of the high priest. there he sat with the guards and warmed himself at the fire.
hurry
john answered, “anyone who has two shirts should share with the one who has none, and anyone who has food should do the same.”
when jesus had entered capernaum, a centurion came to him, asking for help.  “lord,” he said, “my servant lies at home paralyzed, suffering terribly.”
we help a weak person by holding [his/her] hand so that [he/she] will gain the ability to walk so that [he/she] will be able to become ambulatory.
now the crowd that was with him when he called lazarus from the tomb and raised him from the dead continued to spread the word.
white rice
the cat is spoiled because it is used to eating sardines.
but now he has reconciled you by christ's physical body through death to present you holy in his sight, without blemish and free from accusation--
but he was not strong enough, and they lost their place in heaven.
david himself calls him 'lord.' how then can he be his son?" the large crowd listened to him with delight.
if a pregnant pig is rammed into by another pig, it will miscarry and that with which it was pregnant will be discharged.
tea.
they replied, "let one of us sit at your right and the other at your left in your glory."
at once he began to preach in the synagogues that jesus is the son of god.
soon afterward, jesus went to a town called nain, and his disciples and a large crowd went along with him.
pain or lump in the thigh joint.
"yes, lord," she told him, "i believe that you are the christ, the son of god, who was to come into the world."
as for a vertical jump, we [jump] upwards.
and he told them this parable: "the ground of a certain rich man produced a good crop.
pile up, stack up
the lastborn is the final offspring; she will not bear children again.
it’s difficult for us
soap.
walk stooping
the buses and jeeps which pass along the highway, follow their path.
to have a boil form
if one doesn’t know how to use a bolo, he ineffectively cuts the wood.
the people living in that place feel unsafe; all of them will pack up and move at the same time because something is making [them] afraid.
if someone desires to get married, he will pursue it. he will continuously discuss it with the father [of the girl] until he agrees.
and had john beheaded in the prison.
thumb
when someone is pregnant, the baby is positioned when it is not in the right position (lit. if what has happened). and when a person gives birth, [the agud] is the means of helping, by having the hands of the midwife accompany [the baby] during the birthing process.
he lamps when we sleep, we extinguish them.
feed the fire under what’s cooking.
startle someone
i, paul, am writing this with my own hand. i will pay it back--not to mention that you owe me your very self.
it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of god."
then i saw a second beast, coming out of the earth. it had two horns like a lamb, but it spoke like a dragon.
we use a sawing motion to create friction so that we can make fire.
dig with claws or hands
i will return soon
for as in adam all die, so in christ all will be made alive.
they will turn their ears away from the truth and turn aside to myths.
to bend something
to have been given a long life; patient.
cut off
to locate, or go to a specific place for a specific purpose.
i am afraid that when i come again my god will humble me before you, and i will be grieved over many who have sinned earlier and have not repented of the impurity, sexual sin and debauchery in which they have indulged.
when the mother of a child goes off to weed [her field], she leaves her child in the care of someone else and that person watches over him/her.
slice into long thin pieces
until we all reach unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the son of god and become mature, attaining to the whole measure of the fullness of christ.
murder
the next day john saw jesus coming toward him and said, “look, the lamb of god, who takes away the sin of the world!
the length between joints of plants such as bamboo, cane or rattan.
flood over beaches
one of them, named agabus, stood up and through the spirit predicted that a severe famine would spread over the entire roman world. (this happened during the reign of claudius.)
break or cut off stems as one harvests grain
nor can the gift of god be compared with the result of one man’s sin: the judgment followed one sin and brought condemnation, but the gift followed many trespasses and brought justification.
like so
when the trigger slips off, the lever which kills or traps the animal is released.
(they had previously seen trophimus the ephesian in the city with paul and assumed that paul had brought him into the temple area.)
when we aim [a gun] at a bird, and when iwe have sighted  it [we] shoot the gun the and then [the bird] is hit.
remove
jesus replied, “foxes have dens and birds have nests, but the son of man has no place to lay his head.”
lie curled up, coiled (as a snake preparing to strike)
these things happened so that the scripture would be fulfilled: "not one of his bones will be broken,"
we chipped off the surface of the luyung in order to make it thin.
he went to nazareth, where he had been brought up, and on the sabbath day he went into the synagogue, as was his custom. he stood up to read,
to cut in half
as for a dog, when it chews on a bone, it makes a crunching sound.
you made them a little lower than the angels; you crowned them with glory and honor
men will faint from terror, apprehensive of what is coming on the world, for the heavenly bodies will be shaken.
so the last will be first, and the first will be last.”
then he released barabbas to them. but he had jesus flogged, and handed him over to be crucified.
and i will give power to my two witnesses, and they will prophesy for 1,260 days, clothed in sackcloth."
forest plant
and the one who sat there had the appearance of jasper and ruby. a rainbow that shone like an emerald encircled the throne.
we’ll be surrounded by raiders if three people delouse us at once
to be wild, out of control
there is someone who reads something over and over so that he/she can memorize it.
agree
as for the person, he felt his house shake when he slashed the python.
and to put on the new self, created to be like god in true righteousness and holiness.
keep reminding them of these things. warn them before god against quarreling about words; it is of no value, and only ruins those who listen.
if you forgive anyone his sins, they are forgiven; if you do not forgive them, they are not forgiven."
a kind of wood
to suffer a negative result of being interrupted
if one moves very close, they are very near each other.
because by one sacrifice he has made perfect forever those who are being made holy.
the disciples did so, and everyone sat down.
travel
those who sin are to be rebuked publicly, so that the others may take warning.
the brightness causes it to rain.
a woman divided her hair into two parts as she was she was rolling her hair into [two] pompadours [on her head].
i credited your horse first and then [as for] collecting,  you will ask about the payment for your horse.
they discussed it among themselves and said, "if we say, 'from heaven,' he will ask, 'why didn't you believe him?'
when they have become married, he will perform a cerimony to remove the charm which he placed [on her] so that his wife's thinking will become normal again.
he answered, “‘love the lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind’; and, ‘love your neighbor as yourself.’”
i will move to another place for a while.
play two instruments together.
and his interests are divided. an unmarried woman or virgin is concerned about the lord’s affairs: her aim is to be devoted to the lord in both body and spirit. but a married woman is concerned about the affairs of this world—how she can please her husband.
fast, quick
i
they began to question among themselves which of them it might be who would do this.
the person who makes a raft, gets a piece of wood with which to make a cross piece which is tied on with that which is used for binding.
incomplete
and if she divorces her husband and marries another man, she commits adultery."
a large amount of something sliced and set out to dry
as for a person who is angry, he/she hates [someone]and he will be at enmity toward his companion.
wanting to release jesus, pilate appealed to them again.
so i find this law at work: although i want to do good, evil is right there with me.
neither was man created for woman, but woman for man.
hard shell
if the corn flowers wilt, it is a sign that the corn is being blighted.
a person would say something like, "what is that dog after?"
refuse to turn one’s head when called
but stephen, full of the holy spirit, looked up to heaven and saw the glory of god, and jesus standing at the right hand of god.
and also some women who had been cured of evil spirits and diseases: mary (called magdalene) from whom seven demons had come out;
hemorrhage
to leave water; climb up on bank from the river
camote leaves
then he sent another servant to them; they struck this man on the head and treated him shamefully.
well then, you should have put my money on deposit with the bankers, so that when i returned i would have received it back with interest.
when the corn is still unripe, we harvest enough individual plants to cook.
to cheep.
brand new material
when he was gone, jesus said, "now is the son of man glorified and god is glorified in him.
the outer side of a house.
brothers, stop thinking like children. in regard to evil be infants, but in your thinking be adults.
if our sleep is good, we will sleep soundly and it will be a long time before we get up.
she was pregnant and cried out in pain as she was about to give birth.
chair or place to sit
instead, they had some points of dispute with him about their own religion and about a dead man named jesus who paul claimed was alive.
the light of a lamp will never shine in you again. the voice of bridegroom and bride will never be heard in you again. your merchants were the world's great men. by your magic spell all the nations were led astray.
heed
to stress or emphasize something spoken.
creep over ground, as sweet potatoes
ashes
bathless
in beatings, imprisonments and riots; in hard work, sleepless nights and hunger;
knock
you know, brothers and sisters, that our visit to you was not without results.
a person who has chills feels cold because they have malaria.
a house if it only has glass windows, they are transparent because we can see through to the other side because our view is unobstructed.
truly i tell you, whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.
there was a saw which was borrowed by a person. after he used it, he caused it to be borrowed again by another person.
and how can anyone preach unless they are sent? as it is written: “how beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news!”
what then
the burrows of the marmots mound are connected underneath to the places where they make their nests.
rectum
a large herd of pigs was feeding there on the hillside. the demons begged jesus to let them go into the pigs, and he gave them permission.
for this is the reason the gospel was preached even to those who are now dead, so that they might be judged according to human standards in regard to the body, but live according to god in regard to the spirit.
that you may be children of your father in heaven. he causes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous.
he/she briefly looked [at something].
“men of galilee,” they said, “why do you stand here looking into the sky? this same jesus, who has been taken from you into heaven, will come back in the same way you have seen him go into heaven.”
so there was great joy in that city.
if we claim we have not sinned, we make him out to be a liar and his word has no place in our lives.
“now this is eternal life: that they know you, the only true god, and jesus christ, whom you have sent.”
least flycatcher, brown creeper.
rotten
spasmotic coughing
rush someone
musical sound of the kuglung.
a little later someone else saw him and said, "you also are one of them." "man, i am not!" peter replied.
grater
there is a person who cannot see because his eyes are glazed over due to being covered with a white film.
carrying his own cross, he went out to the place of the skull (which in aramaic is called golgotha).
the back
for something to become clear
meddle with or interfere
the person who is making a house, he works hard to finish making it because he will move in.
for the sinful nature desires what is contrary to the spirit, and the spirit what is contrary to the sinful nature. they are in conflict with each other, so that you do not do what you want.
white or grey hairs
if i carry a fox (caught in a snare) through the rice field, daddy will say, “don’t pass through the field with that fox; the rice will die if a fox passes through it.
as the crowds increased, jesus said, "this is a wicked generation. it asks for a miraculous sign, but none will be given it except the sign of jonah.
after jesus said this, he looked toward heaven and prayed:
then one of those standing near drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
that's why we will increase [the amount of] my money so that it will be enough to arrive at maambago.
glimpse
though you have not seen him, you love him; and even though you do not see him now, you believe in him and are filled with an inexpressible and glorious joy,
the person who is sneaking up on his enemy walks in a bent over position.
a person who hops steps with just one foot.

a kind of red rice.
if they were all one part, where would the body be?
difficult
new rolled up leaf
“i have other sheep that are not of this sheep pen. i must bring them also. they too will listen to my voice, and there shall be one flock and one shepherd.”
there was a person who got a bonanza of a large amount of fish which he caught with a net.
small pool on a beach
decorated with twisted metal
neighbor
for this reason they could not believe, because, as isaiah says elsewhere:
name of a stream and village where a crocodile legend is told.
fine bits of metal
so he took him to the commander. the centurion said, "paul, the prisoner, sent for me and asked me to bring this young man to you because he has something to tell you."
they looked for a way to arrest him, but they were afraid of the crowd because the people held that he was a prophet.
they want to be teachers of the law, but they do not know what they are talking about or what they so confidently affirm.
every year jesus’ parents went to jerusalem for the festival of the passover.
“when he comes, he will prove the world to be in the wrong about sin and righteousness and judgment:”
wash hands or dishes
for jesus had said to him, "come out of this man, you evil spirit!"
then the angel took the censer, filled it with fire from the altar, and hurled it on the earth; and there came peals of thunder, rumblings, flashes of lightning and an earthquake.
a kind of vine.
first, i thank my god through jesus christ for all of you, because your faith is being reported all over the world.
already died
at my first defense, no one came to my support, but everyone deserted me. may it not be held against them.
relative.
the ones who say, andi-andì are those who are all girls who are playing.
bolo
to this very hour we go hungry and thirsty, we are in rags, we are brutally treated, we are homeless
busy
the posts of the house have disintegrated because they are rotten.
now i rejoice in what was suffered for you, and i fill up in my flesh what is still lacking in regard to christ's afflictions, for the sake of his body, which is the church.
about an hour later another asserted, "certainly this fellow was with him, for he is a galilean."
locust.
just as the living father sent me and i live because of the father, so the one who feeds on me will live because of me.
tree roots used for planting.
he is dressed in a robe dipped in blood, and his name is the word of god.
rejected suitor
no, the father himself loves you because you have loved me and have believed that i came from god.
all palm trees, when they finish bearing fruit, they die and basiow is what it is called because the inner core is rotting; it is becoming hollow.
the day after.
therefore i want you to know that no one who is speaking by the spirit of god says, “jesus be cursed,” and no one can say, “jesus is lord,” except by the holy spirit.
tropical ulcer
as he neared damascus on his journey, suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him.  he fell to the ground and heard a voice say to him, “saul, saul, why do you persecute me?”
light
to determine
and he performed great and miraculous signs, even causing fire to come down from heaven to earth in full view of men.
to become dry, as plants or clothing
a bird hops when it steps with both feet as it moves around.
without delay he called them, and they left their father zebedee in the boat with the hired men and followed him.
when the governor motioned for him to speak, paul replied: “i know that for a number of years you have been a judge over this nation; so i gladly make my defense.”
dark spot on baby’s sacroiliac.
so i thought it necessary to urge the brothers to visit you in advance and finish the arrangements for the generous gift you had promised. then it will be ready as a generous gift, not as one grudgingly given.
you, don't whisper so loudly because there are those who are sleeping.
peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. “never, lord!” he said. “this shall never happen to you!”
so when those came who were hired first, they expected to receive more. but each one of them also received a denarius.
the son of joanan, the son of rhesa, the son of zerubbabel, the son of shealtiel, the son of neri,
the dog is barking.
how were you inferior to the other churches, except that i was never a burden to you? forgive me this wrong!
the curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom.
line on one’s palm
some of them, however, men from cyprus and cyrene, went to antioch and began to speak to greeks also, telling them the good news about the lord jesus.
“if you love me, keep my commands.”
if we eat something that still has a bone, we chew on it until it is stripped of meat.
to get a bonanza as a huge catch of fish or a jackpot in gambling
what good is it, my brothers, if a man claims to have faith but has no deeds? can such faith save him?
finally, be strong in the lord and in his mighty power.
claim
then i looked, and there before me was the lamb, standing on mount zion, and with him 144,000 who had his name and his father's name written on their foreheads.
there is someone who asks how many families live in that baranggay. the reply is, “there are many families who live here.”
how i wish i could be with you now and change my tone, because i am perplexed about you!
a rattan seive is the plug of a lime container. it is made of rattan and is a seive for the lime.
who has saved us and called us to a holy life--not because of anything we have done but because of his own purpose and grace. this grace was given us in christ jesus before the beginning of time,
and he said to his attendants, “this is john the baptist; he has risen from the dead! that is why miraculous powers are at work in him.”
for man did not come from woman, but woman from man;
as for a stream that was cleared of debris, the debris was gathered together at the side of the stream.
choose for oneself
jesus said to them, "if god were your father, you would love me, for i came from god and now am here. i have not come on my own; but he sent me.
argue
now he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will also supply and increase your store of seed and will enlarge the harvest of your righteousness.
pass through, as water leaking through a pot
steam
several days later felix came with his wife drusilla, who was a jewess. he sent for paul and listened to him as he spoke about faith in christ jesus.
"do you want me to release to you the king of the jews?" asked pilate,
for this reason i remind you to fan into flame the gift of god, which is in you through the laying on of my hands.
laugh unrestrainably with each other
to playfully threaten to hit someone
if there is anything further you want to bring up, it must be settled in a legal assembly.
water thrush
therefore encourage each other with these words.
sand
the seed falling on rocky ground refers to someone who hears the word and at once receives it with joy.
zerubbabel the father of abihud, abihud the father of eliakim, eliakim the father of azor,
blessed are you when people hate you, when they exclude you and insult you and reject your name as evil, because of the son of man.
when it goes inside, the head of the snake enters the hole first.
to envision, have a vision.
solitary tree
night and day among the tombs and in the hills he would cry out and cut himself with stones.
the kampilan is a warrior's knife used to kill people.
from miletus, paul sent to ephesus for the elders of the church.
in the same way, after supper he took the cup, saying, "this cup is the new covenant in my blood; do this, whenever you drink it, in remembrance of me."
hit it when you shoot the arrow.
and so that all will be condemned who have not believed the truth but have delighted in wickedness.
permit something to fully develop or mature
pelvic bone
"do not stop him," jesus said, "for whoever is not against you is for you."
to obey
pick it up with the cloth.
but the gift is not like the trespass. for if the many died by the trespass of the one man, how much more did god’s grace and the gift that came by the grace of the one man, jesus christ, overflow to the many!
to complete
“but our ancestors refused to obey him. instead, they rejected him and in their hearts turned back to egypt.
they were being crushed because it was a narrow place.
filth, grime
jesus replied, “moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. but it was not this way from the beginning.
“i have given them your word and the world has hated them, for they are not of the world any more than i am of the world.”
‘these who were hired last worked only one hour,’ they said, ‘and you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden of the work and the heat of the day.’
the chief priests of the jews protested to pilate, "do not write 'the king of the jews,' but that this man claimed to be king of the jews."
to accompany someone or something
he didn't catch the ball which was thrown because it passed him but another person was able to catch it
he asked, ‘how did you get in here without wedding clothes, friend?’ the man was speechless.
to fold leaves of certain rattan and palm leaves when preparing leaves for roofing so that they all hang in the same direction
near; closely related; close to a certain time; almost; nearly
when we were still children in the past, playing was the only thing we knew about.
we demolish arguments and every pretension that sets itself up against the knowledge of god, and we take captive every thought to make it obedient to christ.
the reason it becomes difficult to saw is because there is a lot of sawdust.
to pay a brideprice
rope, string; to twist two or more strands together
a kind of vine that's used to make a drink for a mother
[as for] the person who doesn't believe a warning that there are raiders, [he] will be ensnared by [something] bad because he will be murdered.
a kind of spear
i beg you that when i come i may not have to be as bold as i expect to be toward some people who think that we live by the standards of this world.
‘an enemy did this,’ he replied. the servants asked him, ‘do you want us to go and pull them up?’
to vow
shortly before dawn jesus went out to them, walking on the lake.
chest used to store things.
make a fire
"by what authority are you doing these things?" they asked. "and who gave you authority to do this?"
when sweet potatoes are cooked, ig there is inadequate fuel, it will be hard; it will be hard because it is still raw.
and do not grumble, as some of them did—and were killed by the destroying angel.
when evening came, many who were demon-possessed were brought to him, and he drove out the spirits with a word and healed all the sick.
look at my hands and my feet. it is i myself! touch me and see; a ghost does not have flesh and bones, as you see i have."
as for people, [they] are born ihere in the world
as you help us by your prayers. then many will give thanks on our behalf for the gracious favor granted us in answer to the prayers of many.
we know that we have passed from death to life, because we love our brothers. anyone who does not love remains in death.
your beauty should not come from outward adornment, such as braided hair and the wearing of gold jewelry and fine clothes.
so then, no more boasting about men! all things are yours,
that evening after sunset the people brought to jesus all the sick and demonpossessed.
brat
then the jews began to argue sharply among themselves, "how can this man give us his flesh to eat?"
to humble one's self
the water carried away the corn which had not yet been divided into shares.
if it is to encourage, then give encouragement; if it is giving, then give generously; if it is to lead, do it diligently; if it is to show mercy, do it cheerfully.
wiggle
they are banding together to attack a certain house.
for this reason they could not believe, because, as isaiah says elsewhere:
lips.
the niece who had been recently married was broken loose from her marriage relationship by her aunt because she had simply advised her to desert her husband.
cause to happen.
stir
the children are chewing|and sucking on on the sugarcane.
not fitting
the woman who was worried about her mate who was slow to arrive and come into the house says, "your nose is too much which causes people to be very worried."
far above all rule and authority, power and dominion, and every name that is invoked, not only in the present age but also in the one to come.
all the prophets testify about him that everyone who believes in him receives forgiveness of sins through his name.”
jesus went up on a mountainside and called to him those he wanted, and they came to him.
yet now i am happy, not because you were made sorry, but because your sorrow led you to repentance. for you became sorrowful as god intended and so were not harmed in any way by us.
in our place, there are strong winds which are carried by whirlwinds which are able to blow off a roof.
discern
you start off first.
but god chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise; god chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong.
a type of tree
to propagate or cause to increase (animals, seed, fish)
to say whew when out of breath
asat grated the coconut.
and for many days he was seen by those who had traveled with him from galilee to jerusalem. they are now his witnesses to our people.
to clear away debris or spider webs from any area using any instrument such as a broom, a rake, a stick or even one’s hands
did not the christ have to suffer these things and then enter his glory?"
household
there are different kinds of working, but in all of them and in everyone it is the same god at work.
travel by pair
they urgently pleaded with us for the privilege of sharing in this service to the lord’s people.
he wanted to see who jesus was, but being a short man he could not, because of the crowd.
we split open the pula palm tree which we have notched and then we see many white grubs which are wiggling about.
well then, you should have put my money on deposit with the bankers, so that when i returned i would have received it back with interest.
but when you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
with great power the apostles continued to testify to the resurrection of the lord jesus. and god’s grace was so powerfully at work in them all
paul, called to be an apostle of christ jesus by the will of god, and our brother sosthenes,
to love, care about (someone)
and now it is because of my hope in what god has promised our ancestors that i am on trial today.
to faint or take a nap
speak and act as those who are going to be judged by the law that gives freedom,
strong
“now that you know these things, you will be blessed if you do them.”
bread.
offend
but give what is inside the dish to the poor, and everything will be clean for you.
as i urged you when i went into macedonia, stay there in ephesus so that you may command certain people not to teach false doctrines any longer
and said to jesus, “teacher, this woman was caught in the act of adultery.”
then i saw another angel coming up from the east, having the seal of the living god. he called out in a loud voice to the four angels who had been given power to harm the land and the sea:
lot of rain
he took peter, james and john along with him, and he began to be deeply distressed and troubled.
to be effective.
we act irresponsible because we’ve been charmed.
bamboo container for fish
as for camote plants, when we plant them, the roots follow the stem (lit. body).
but now in christ jesus you who once were far away have been brought near by the blood of christ.
so from that day on they plotted to take his life.
another disciple said to him, “lord, first let me go and bury my father.”
his disciples remembered that it is written: “zeal for your house will consume me.”
now as for me, i’m leaving.
for one's head to be off center or leaning to one side
then jesus said to them, “do not be afraid. go and tell my brothers to go to galilee; there they will see me.”
as for zeal, persecuting the church; as for legalistic righteousness, faultless.
they had breastplates like breastplates of iron, and the sound of their wings was like the thundering of many horses and chariots rushing into battle.
the roasted kernels of corn is fed to the mother who has newly given birth so that the blood clots will be discharged from her body.
"what do you want with us, jesus of nazareth? have you come to destroy us? i know who you are--the holy one of god!"
so when you are assembled and i am with you in spirit, and the power of our lord jesus is present,
so there was great joy in that city.
when herod saw jesus, he was greatly pleased, because for a long time he had been wanting to see him. from what he had heard about him, he hoped to see him perform some miracle.
brothers, do not slander one another. anyone who speaks against his brother or judges him speaks against the law and judges it. when you judge the law, you are not keeping it, but sitting in judgment on it.
an accusation
each of the four living creatures had six wings and was covered with eyes all around, even under his wings. day and night they never stop saying: "holy, holy, holy is the lord god almighty, who was, and is, and is to come."
dance
his master replied, ‘well done, good and faithful servant! you have been faithful with a few things; i will put you in charge of many things. come and share your master’s happiness!’
now if there is no resurrection, what will those do who are baptized for the dead? if the dead are not raised at all, why are people baptized for them?
against all hope, abraham in hope believed and so became the father of many nations, just as it had been said to him, “so shall your offspring be.”
fruit of a vine used to poison fish
to regard something or someone in some way
bad smelling
river near the agusan davao boundary.
noose.
the only way the word is used is if we have a companion whom [we] invite to go bathing with us and i say, "just bring the fragrant soap".
wide-eyed
when mary heard this, she got up quickly and went to him.
i say this to shame you. is it possible that there is nobody among you wise enough to judge a dispute between believers?
in order
after herod had a thorough search made for him and did not find him, he cross-examined the guards and ordered that they be executed. then herod went from judea to caesarea and stayed there.
to boil a liquid
"behold, i come like a thief! blessed is he who stays awake and keeps his clothes with him, so that he may not go naked and be shamefully exposed." then they gathered the kings together to the place that in hebrew is called armageddon.
as jesus walked beside the sea of galilee, he saw simon and his brother andrew casting a net into the lake, for they were fishermen.
they are not arranged yet
as for aluminum roofing which is very thin, it easily becomes dented when we step on it while using it to make a roof.
but the righteousness that is by faith says: “do not say in your heart, ‘who will ascend into heaven?’” (that is, to bring christ down)
when he said this, all his opponents were humiliated, but the people were delighted with all the wonderful things he was doing.
he said, “the knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of god has been given to you, but to others i speak in parables, so that, ‘though seeing, they may not see; though hearing, they may not understand.’
if there is a child who was born outside the village who is [deliberately] left behind by the mother, it has been abandoned by her.
country
soft soil.
but when the chief priests and the teachers of the law saw the wonderful things he did and the children shouting in the temple courts, “hosanna to the son of david,” they were indignant.
be completely humble and gentle; be patient, bearing with one another in love.
but if i drive out demons by the finger of god, then the kingdom of god has come to you.
as jesus was sitting on the mount of olives, the disciples came to him privately. “tell us,” they said, “when will this happen, and what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the age?”
as it is written: “the one who gathered much did not have too much, and the one who gathered little did not have too little.”
the apostles left the sanhedrin, rejoicing because they had been counted worthy of suffering disgrace for the name.
a tire becomes smaller if it has a hole because the air will be expelled.
because she heard her name mentioned, she discerned that someone had spoken badly about her.
for our "god is a consuming fire."
sweet
it was about this time that king herod arrested some who belonged to the church, intending to persecute them.
to decompose (wood becoming soft and crumbly)
then he told her, "for such a reply, you may go; the demon has left your daughter."
we will hurry up to bathe at the pool because there are no people yet.
who disobeyed long ago when god waited patiently in the days of noah while the ark was being built. in it only a few people, eight in all, were saved through water,
jesus asked him, “what is your name?” “legion,” he replied, because many demons had gone into him.
run noisily
agree to marriage
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; poor, yet making many rich; having nothing, and yet possessing everything.
among them are hymenaeus and alexander, whom i have handed over to satan to be taught not to blaspheme.
for through him we both have access to the father by one spirit.
forceful
a house, if it only has glass windows, they are transparent because we can see through to the other side because our view is unobstructed.
to flap, as a rooster flaps its wings.
?
newly
hull
the person got some rice and added canned fish to it to feed the cat.
to cut and trim stalks and tips from any kind of bamboo
opps
salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us—
he and all his family were devout and god-fearing; he gave generously to those in need and prayed to god regularly.
that person said, “i admit that it was really me who stole from you.”
father
tiny abaca bugs
expect
again jesus said, "peace be with you! as the father has sent me, i am sending you."
place
as for grubs, one makes notches in the wood; it is grooved.
you, however, know all about my teaching, my way of life, my purpose, faith, patience, love, endurance,
all that the father gives me will come to me, and whoever comes to me i will never drive away.
no, but the sacrifices of pagans are offered to demons, not to god, and i do not want you to be participants with demons.
the floor sagged when something heavy was placed on it but it didn't break.
but he did not consummate their marriage until she gave birth to a son. and he gave him the name jesus.
when the congregation was dismissed, many of the jews and devout converts to judaism followed paul and barnabas, who talked with them and urged them to continue in the grace of god.
i am not saying this because i am in need, for i have learned to be content whatever the circumstances.
yet saul grew more and more powerful and baffled the jews living in damascus by proving that jesus is the messiah.
once more pilate came out and said to the jews gathered there, “look, i am bringing him out to you to let you know that i find no basis for a charge against him.”
matches
if we eat something that still has a bone, we bite into chew the flesh off until it is stripped of meat.
the son of matthat, the son of levi, the son of melki, the son of jannai, the son of joseph,
“at that time moses was born, and he was no ordinary child. for three months he was cared for by his family.
jesus answered him, "i tell you the truth, today you will be with me in paradise."
but the lord is faithful, and he will strengthen you and protect you from the evil one.
but when the set time had fully come, god sent his son, born of a woman, born under the law,  to redeem those under the law, that we might receive adoption to sonship.
drink from a water pole.
chew the medicine.
saul got up from the ground, but when he opened his eyes he could see nothing. so they led him by the hand into damascus.
then philip ran up to the chariot and heard the man reading isaiah the prophet. “do you understand what you are reading?” philip asked.
for we have heard him say that this jesus of nazareth will destroy this place and change the customs moses handed down to us.”
and he is also the father of the circumcised who not only are circumcised but who also walk in the footsteps of the faith that our father abraham had before he was circumcised.
then the angel carried me away in the spirit into a wilderness. there i saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast that was covered with blasphemous names and had seven heads and ten horns.
guarantee
firefly.
for it has been granted to you on behalf of christ not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for him,
and as he taught them, he said, "is it not written: " 'my house will be called a house of prayer for all nations' ? but you have made it 'a den of robbers.' "
whoever regards one day as special does so to the lord. whoever eats meat does so to the lord, for they give thanks to god; and whoever abstains does so to the lord and gives thanks to god.
small bag with a drawstring for carrying items
when soup spills, the contents fall out
overcast
replace
roast over a fire
for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of god,
grey
then the chief priests and the elders of the people assembled in the palace of the high priest, whose name was caiaphas,
show, demonstrate, as to show a person his fault.
receive money for work
fragment, piece of something
a person who has no love for his companion ostracizes him.
then he rolled up the scroll, gave it back to the attendant and sat down. the eyes of everyone in the synagogue were fastened on him.
become stiff
he was given power to make war against the saints and to conquer them. and he was given authority over every tribe, people, language and nation.
but he answered one of them, ‘i am not being unfair to you, friend. didn’t you agree to work for a denarius?
philip said, “lord, show us the father and that will be enough for us.”
that’s enough.
do you not know that in a race all the runners run, but only one gets the prize? run in such a way as to get the prize.
to writhe (like fish)
that which is thrown.
whole group
his fever decreased.
to perspire
he gave strict orders not to let anyone know about this, and told them to give her something to eat.
again, the devil took him to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their splendor.
if there are those in a some village who are under someone's authority, it seems that they are all his subjects.
to claim something for oneself.
be dark as at night or when there is rain
and they took offense at him. but jesus said to them, “a prophet is not without honor except in his own town and in his own home.”
ridgepole
afterward, as you know, when he wanted to inherit this blessing, he was rejected. he could bring about no change of mind, though he sought the blessing with tears.
to be alert and energetic
something used to fasten by pressing against an object, as bamboo strips for walling
even though you should happen to choose, yet if  requested is excessive, you will be unable to get it.
they were terrified and asked each other, "who is this? even the wind and the waves obey him!"
after this, paul left athens and went to corinth.
rice husks
doorway
none of the rulers of this age understood it, for if they had, they would not have crucified the lord of glory.
whoever has stamina to come along, he/she will be chosen.
if it could, would they not have stopped being offered? for the worshipers would have been cleansed once for all, and would no longer have felt guilty for their sins.
i do not want you to be ignorant of this mystery, brothers, so that you may not be conceited: israel has experienced a hardening in part until the full number of the gentiles has come in.
tin can used for cooking
arrange to meet someone somewhere
urinate
if there are those who are having a sacrificial ceremony, they constantly play a rhythm on a drum. the drum which is played is beaten with sticks or one's hands.
speak clearly and directly
to die before one harvests his field
stunted, dwarfed
where jesus, who went before us, has entered on our behalf. he has become a high priest forever, in the order of melchizedek.
“we gave you strict orders not to teach in this name,” he said. “yet you have filled jerusalem with your teaching and are determined to make us guilty of this man’s blood.”
but thanks be to god! he gives us the victory through our lord jesus christ.
when there are many people, we have to squeeze in and out to get by.
now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: "the one i kiss is the man; arrest him and lead him away under guard."
as for the flesh of large fish, the bones can be filleted; the bones are removed.
again, it says, “rejoice, you gentiles, with his people.”
the evil spirits will devour you.
clanmate
after he had dismissed them, he went up on a mountainside by himself to pray. later that night, he was there alone,
we prepare ourselves ahead of time. it's as if we have had a intuitive warning.
jesus said to them, “truly i tell you, at the renewal of all things, when the son of man sits on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of israel.
to recover emotionally from some traumatic event.
the tail of a fish
a kind of large fish
constipated
i pray that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened in order that you may know the hope to which he has called you, the riches of his glorious inheritance in his holy people,
to set aside by itself
then he said to them, "the sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath.
if you are taken along to another work, you are drawn over to it.
skirt
but the beast was captured, and with it the false prophet who had performed the signs on its behalf. with these signs he had deluded those who had received the mark of the beast and worshiped its image. the two of them were thrown alive into the fiery lake of burning sulfur.
good, beautiful, clean, peaceful
to take/bring something across (river) to someone else
joseph, a levite from cyprus, whom the apostles called barnabas (which means “son of encouragement”),
rice husks
preach the word; be prepared in season and out of season; correct, rebuke and encourage—with great patience and careful instruction.
one person killed by one raider
a large crowd followed and pressed around him. and a woman was there who had been subject to bleeding for twelve years.
but god has revealed it to us by his spirit.
if there is no secondary channel, we recognize when the water is returning to its place because the beach becomes large as it is left behind by the water.
at this, those who heard began to go away one at a time, the older ones first, until only jesus was left, with the woman still standing there.
constantly
but i ask: did they not hear? of course they did: “their voice has gone out into all the earth, their words to the ends of the world.”
and to whom did god swear that they would never enter his rest if not to those who disobeyed?
he dealt treacherously with our people and oppressed our ancestors by forcing them to throw out their newborn babies so that they would die.
ascend
instead we should write to them, telling them to abstain from food polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from the meat of strangled animals and from blood.
“this is the moses who told the israelites, ‘god will raise up for you a prophet like me from your own people.’
plain black cloth (used for blouses)
large pox
to cause or predict bad luck
at the same time he was hoping that paul would offer him a bribe, so he sent for him frequently and talked with him.
then a mighty angel picked up a boulder the size of a large millstone and threw it into the sea, and said: “with such violence the great city of babylon will be thrown down, never to be found again.
sugarcane
the person, he is repeatedly carrying wood on his shoulders to use to for building a fire.
dried salted fish
why should any of you consider it incredible that god raises the dead?
tip out; pour or dump
while he was still speaking, judas, one of the twelve, arrived. with him was a large crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and the elders of the people.
the king is familiar with these things, and i can speak freely to him. i am convinced that none of this has escaped his notice, because it was not done in a corner.
the male monkey, that is the leader of a group of monkeys.
always
dust
he is not the god of the dead, but of the living, for to him all are alive."
peter and his companions were very sleepy, but when they became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.
gills
if the whole body were an eye, where would the sense of hearing be? if the whole body were an ear, where would the sense of smell be?
the people expected him to swell up or suddenly fall dead, but after waiting a long time and seeing nothing unusual happen to him, they changed their minds and said he was a god.
we will be quick to return home because the sun will go down.
in this same way, husbands ought to love their wives as their own bodies. he who loves his wife loves himself.
kick
he went there to register with mary, who was pledged to be married to him and was expecting a child.
receive something
have them wind each other with red [material].
jesus was in the stern, sleeping on a cushion. the disciples woke him and said to him, "teacher, don't you care if we drown?"
long, curved knife
guardian of the house ties
the soul hasn’t yet been reunited with the body; it’s bad luck
it has always been my ambition to preach the gospel where christ was not known, so that i would not be building on someone else's foundation.
to hold something in one's mouth
i did not see a temple in the city, because the lord god almighty and the lamb are its temple.
do your best to get here before winter. eubulus greets you, and so do pudens, linus, claudia and all the brothers.
having tiny holes or leaks
undergo a trial to prove oneself innocent of an accusation
after jesus was born in bethlehem in judea, during the time of king herod, magi from the east came to jerusalem.
when we go on an errand to the forest and there is no water nearby, we cut a vine and pour its water out and drink it because we are thirsty.
because we have heard of your faith in christ jesus and of the love you have for all god’s people—
kind of mottled rice
the disciples went and did as jesus had instructed them.
if there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
even as i try to please everybody in every way. for i am not seeking my own good but the good of many, so that they may be saved.
belt buckle.
lift up, as a light or one's hands
to spread (like paste)
to hire someone to take harvest downriver
he has a steward who is the guardian of the plants and that is kalayag.
also a dispute arose among them as to which of them was considered to be greatest.
they followed him because he had amazed them for a long time with his sorcery.
seeing in the distance a fig tree in leaf, he went to find out if it had any fruit. when he reached it, he found nothing but leaves, because it was not the season for figs.
a mediator, however, implies more than one party; but god is one.
the child stopped when his mother called.
resh water snail.
yoohoo
i assure you that there were many widows in israel in elijah’s time, when the sky was shut for three and a half years and there was a severe famine throughout the land.
he has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant david
as for a person who is making a house, when he set the houseposts in place, he gets something to use as a brace with which to provide support for the housepost.
the man who loves his life will lose it, while the man who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.
cloth or abaka fiber bag worn on the back
to have gone, or to have left for home
he said to them, "do you still not understand?"
call
they sold property and possessions to give to anyone who had need.
in the same way, on the outside you appear to people as righteous but on the inside you are full of hypocrisy and wickedness.
jesus replied, "let us go somewhere else--to the nearby villages--so i can preach there also. that is why i have come."
so too, at the present time there is a remnant chosen by grace.
praise your child
if you show special attention to the man wearing fine clothes and say, "here's a good seat for you," but say to the poor man, "you stand there" or "sit on the floor by my feet,"
great grandparent
be depressed
abraham replied, ‘they have moses and the prophets; let them listen to them.’
have nothing to do with godless myths and old wives’ tales; rather, train yourself to be godly.
good for making lumber
as the men were leaving jesus, peter said to him, “master, it is good for us to be here. let us put up three shelters—one for you, one for moses and one for elijah.” (he did not know what he was saying.)
even elizabeth your relative is going to have a child in her old age, and she who was said to be unable to conceive is in her sixth month.
the disciples did so, and everyone sat down.
hard shell
i tell you the truth, wherever the gospel is preached throughout the world, what she has done will also be told, in memory of her."
kobbiung tune and dance.
i wanted to know why they were accusing him, so i brought him to their sanhedrin.
the son of man will send out his angels, and they will weed out of his kingdom everything that causes sin and all who do evil.
some people standing there asked, "what are you doing, untying that colt?"
as for the teacher who was returning home to maniki, she was taken part way by the children as far as patil.
“you have heard that it was said, ‘you shall not commit adultery.’
a person who is making a field, has an ending of the edge of his field and that is how far he will allow his field to extend.
an
i’ll borrow your awl if you have one.
whole kernels cut from a corncob
jesus asked him, “what is your name?” “legion,” he replied, because many demons had gone into him.
if he knew that i was having a hard time, he would reduce [the amount] which he would have me pay back.
stare
grass
the disciples asked him, “why then do the teachers of the law say that elijah must come first?”
the devil led him up to a high place and showed him in an instant all the kingdoms of the world.
camote leaves
to run in different directions as boys do when playing basketball
he made the cloth like new.
for they themselves report what kind of reception you gave us. they tell how you turned to god from idols to serve the living and true god,
wealthy in clothing
the fire flares up.
compassionate
glutton
large brown earthworm
woven bracelet
so the man went away and began to tell in the decapolis how much jesus had done for him. and all the people were amazed.
“the gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice. he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.”
for you
the person who dries rice in the sun frequently stirs and spreads it around.
" 'sir,' they said, 'he already has ten!'
long ago, the old days, the past
if he didn't catch it, he didn't [successfully] go after and catch it.
when we have been there for a day, we will continue to our true destination.
it got wet some time ago.
a wooden pole fastened between two sturdy trees (part of a pig trap)
we are fools for christ, but you are so wise in christ! we are weak, but you are strong! you are honored, we are dishonored!
already you have all you want! already you have become rich! you have begun to reign—and that without us! how i wish that you really had begun to reign so that we also might reign with you!
requesting
pour melted pork fat into a bamboo tube
just my size.
pig can also be shooed away.
he longed to fill his stomach with the pods that the pigs were eating, but no one gave him anything.
for what was glorious has no glory now in comparison with the surpassing glory.
i tell you the truth, anyone who will not receive the kingdom of god like a little child will never enter it."
for it is commendable if a man bears up under the pain of unjust suffering because he is conscious of god.
(this mary, whose brother lazarus now lay sick, was the same one who poured perfume on the lord and wiped his feet with her hair.)
cut off the sugarcane at the roots.
if your brother or sister sins, go and point out their fault, just between the two of you. if they listen to you, you have won them over.
good character
for god does not show favoritism.
for this very reason, christ died and returned to life so that he might be the lord of both the dead and the living.
stir
go! i am sending you out like lambs among wolves.
if we kill a horse, we give it a death blow on it's head with the back of an axe.
look down
but jesus knew what they were thinking and said to the man with the shriveled hand, “get up and stand in front of everyone.” so he got up and stood there.
not yet.
but, dear friends, remember what the apostles of our lord jesus christ foretold.
elope
now listen, you rich people, weep and wail because of the misery that is coming upon you.
to succeed, accomplish
mash or pulverize.
this was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet isaiah: “he took up our infirmities and bore our diseases.”
if we make a waterhole on the beach, we place sand there so that the debris will be filtered out.
he came to that which was his own, but his own did not receive him.
if it is an adult who cries to go along [with someone], he will pressure the person [into letting him] come.
consistent
he said to them, “how is it then that david, speaking by the spirit, calls him ‘lord’? for he says,
for you know what instructions we gave you by the authority of the lord jesus.
jesus sent him home, saying, "don't go into the village. "
their destiny is destruction, their god is their stomach, and their glory is in their shame. their mind is on earthly things.
whoever believes in me, as the scripture has said, streams of living water will flow from within him."
where she entered zechariah’s home and greeted elizabeth.
to have been given a long life; patient.
to be spread out (circular or with discernable boundary)
that is why i am suffering as i am. yet i am not ashamed, because i know whom i have believed, and am convinced that he is able to guard what i have entrusted to him for that day.
the phosphorescent leaf, that is what we use to light up our pathway.
the crowds answered, “this is jesus, the prophet from nazareth in galilee.”
it does not, therefore, depend on human desire or effort, but on god’s mercy.
paw as of a dog or cat
forgive us our sins, for we also forgive everyone who sins against us. and lead us not into temptation. ' "
hair barrette
he then brought them out and asked, "sirs, what must i do to be saved?"
when you enter a town and are welcomed, eat what is set before you.
the creeks which have become shallow pools, we remove the water until it dries up and then we can catch the fish [and other edible water creatures].
when jesus heard that john had been put in prison, he withdrew to galilee.
and declared, “this fellow said, ‘i am able to destroy the temple of god and rebuild it in three days.’”
we point at the dove’s call.
it has wide leaves which extend in a straight line from the body of that kapigsula tree.
kind of bird weighing around 3 kilos
each day jesus was teaching at the temple, and each evening he went out to spend the night on the hill called the mount of olives,
eye
then jesus told his disciples a parable to show them that they should always pray and not give up.
you are those who have stood by me in my trials.
they must keep hold of the deep truths of the faith with a clear conscience.
name of a river north of mansalinow which flows into the liboganon river; also a village at the river junction.
join with others in following my example, brothers, and take note of those who live according to the pattern we gave you.
push
rapids of a river.
some of the teachers of the law responded, "well said, teacher!"
brideprice
don't grumble against each other, brothers, or you will be judged. the judge is standing at the door!
the islanders showed us unusual kindness. they built a fire and welcomed us all because it was raining and cold.
there are different kinds of gifts, but the same spirit distributes them.
anyone, then, who knows the good he ought to do and doesn't do it, sins.
when the lamb opened the fourth seal, i heard the voice of the fourth living creature say, “come!”
so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed. and a sword will pierce your own soul too.”
greedily and repeatedly stuff one’s mouth with food
candy was used to pacify the child who was crying.
offspring of a mudfish
wing
those who use the things of the world, as if not engrossed in them. for this world in its present form is passing away.
he withdrew about a stone's throw beyond them, knelt down and prayed,
in the first place, i hear that when you come together as a church, there are divisions among you, and to some extent i believe it.
on their release, peter and john went back to their own people and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them.
"who has known the mind of the lord? or who has been his counselor?"
if anyone is ashamed of me and my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the son of man will be ashamed of him when he comes in his father's glory with the holy angels."
aware of their discussion, jesus asked, “you of little faith, why are you talking among yourselves about having no bread?
fall apart
and when jesus had cried out again in a loud voice, he gave up his spirit.
poke the eyes
if we are in despair, even if there is someone to resolve [the person's] feelings, his/her feelings won't be resolved and he/she will think of killing himself/herself
to close eyelids, especially in lullabies
there is someone who gets annoyed by the children if they are playing
that one.
and with that he breathed on them and said, "receive the holy spirit.
affix for irrealis, having various grammatical functions.
a certain man from cyrene, simon, the father of alexander and rufus, was passing by on his way in from the country, and they forced him to carry the cross.
we cause [people] to hear what we have to say.
pat
"i have come to bring fire on the earth, and how i wish it were already kindled!
they completely cut down all of the bamboo for weaving which i had planted without letting it be known by a request. that conduct of theirs usurped the rights of their companion.
canoe.
cornelius answered: “three days ago i was in my house praying at this hour, at three in the afternoon. suddenly a man in shining clothes stood before me
it doesn't work to sift (lit. if one sifts) something wet because it would stick.
you
forgotten
“jesus of nazareth,” they replied. “i am he,” jesus said. (and judas the traitor was standing there with them.)
he told them, ‘you also go and work in my vineyard, and i will pay you whatever is right.’
a kind of banana
when the disciples heard this, they fell facedown to the ground, terrified.
duration
really
tiny bell
if there is no dam (lit dam of water), it is not possible to make rice paddies.
if there is mucus, he will blow it out.
now i am ready to visit you for the third time, and i will not be a burden to you, because what i want is not your possessions but you. after all, children should not have to save up for their parents, but parents for their children.
have pity on me.
swim or float downriver with the current
and you will be blessed. although they cannot repay you, you will be repaid at the resurrection of the righteous."
to make murky or opaque (as of water)
the dispute became so violent that the commander was afraid paul would be torn to pieces by them. he ordered the troops to go down and take him away from them by force and bring him into the barracks.
finish
everyone who heard this wondered about it, asking, “what then is this child going to be?” for the lord’s hand was with him.
the sharpened spikes inside a fish container and certain traps which prevent the catch from spilling out or escaping
he replied: "watch out that you are not deceived. for many will come in my name, claiming, 'i am he,' and, 'the time is near.' do not follow them.
to mutter to oneself, similar to mugunmugun but different from a whisper
once i was alive apart from the law; but when the commandment came, sin sprang to life and i died.
give thanks in all circumstances; for this is god’s will for you in christ jesus.
as it is written in the book of the words of isaiah the prophet: “a voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘prepare the way for the lord, make straight paths for him.
if she will no longer give-birth, she will stop bearing.
he/she doesn’t stop
then some soldiers asked him, “and what should we do?” he replied, “don’t extort money and don’t accuse people falsely—be content with your pay.”
well-behaved
good or bad omen.
this is a trustworthy saying that deserves full acceptance.
afterward jesus appeared in a different form to two of them while they were walking in the country.
the person who is making a house, he works hard to finish making it because he will move in.
for john came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘he has a demon.’
if you have been caught by darkness, it will be difficult for you to arrive at your dwelling place because where you travel is dark.
we sit in a circle to eat together. there is just one receptacle where food is served.
if my son marries, his wife is my daughter-in-law.
they have made a commitment [to each other] because their feelings (lit. breath) were the same. they have come to an agreement with each other. they desire each other. the attraction of the two [of them] is mutual.
peter followed him out of the prison, but he had no idea that what the angel was doing was really happening; he thought he was seeing a vision.
then the disciples went back to where they were staying.
for i testify that they gave as much as they were able, and even beyond their ability. entirely on their own,
i write these things to you who believe in the name of the son of god so that you may know that you have eternal life.
water which is sediment free is also transparent. that which is sediment-free and that which is clear, they have nothing which blocks
this mystery is that through the gospel the gentiles are heirs together with israel, members together of one body, and sharers together in the promise in christ jesus.
kapok is burned on my arm.
they will kill him, and on the third day he will be raised to life.” and the disciples were filled with grief.
if the pangi fruit has just fallen, it is not ready to take.
fine salt
tired of
then one of the elders asked me, “these in white robes—who are they, and where did they come from?”
squelch someone in conversation
kind of bony, transparent fish
kind of bird; killdeer, red-legged partridge, least sandpiper
when she and the members of her household were baptized, she invited us to her home. “if you consider me a believer in the lord,” she said, “come and stay at my house.” and she persuaded us.
and you are proud! shouldn’t you rather have gone into mourning and have put out of your fellowship the man who has been doing this?
“now they know that everything you have given me comes from you.”
now faith is confidence in what we hope for and assurance about what we do not see.
expect
ascend
and you say, ‘if we had lived in the days of our ancestors, we would not have taken part with them in shedding the blood of the prophets.’
enoch, the seventh from adam, prophesied about these men: "see, the lord is coming with thousands upon thousands of his holy ones
o project beyond a certain point.
do you not know that we will judge angels? how much more the things of this life!
who is the liar? it is the man who denies that jesus is the christ. such a man is the antichrist--he denies the father and the son.
who will mock him and spit on him, flog him and kill him. three days later he will rise."
the angel said to him, “i am gabriel. i stand in the presence of god, and i have been sent to speak to you and to tell you this good news.
kind of bird, dark feathers on back and light-colored breast
skinny
dark rainclouds, thunderheads
with this in mind, we constantly pray for you, that our god may make you worthy of his calling, and that by his power he may bring to fruition your every desire for goodness and your every deed prompted by faith.
and cry out: “ ‘woe! woe to you, great city, dressed in fine linen, purple and scarlet, and glittering with gold, precious stones and pearls!
and this water symbolizes baptism that now saves you also--not the removal of dirt from the body but the pledge of a good conscience toward god. it saves you by the resurrection of jesus christ,
do not rebuke an older man harshly, but exhort him as if he were your father. treat younger men as brothers,
cat, either wild or tame
the disciples said to him, “if this is the situation between a husband and wife, it is better not to marry.”
then he called two of his centurions and ordered them, "get ready a detachment of two hundred soldiers, seventy horsemen and two hundred spearmen to go to caesarea at nine tonight.
the children are learning to write.
it’s improbable that we would get it since we’re women.
the crowd that followed kept shouting, "away with him!"
for whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for me and for the gospel will save it.
[as for] inagkud, corn and rice are mixed together which will become agkud.
such "wisdom" does not come down from heaven but is earthly, unspiritual, of the devil.
to figure in someone's dream which foretells some bad circumstance
thanks be to god, who delivers me through jesus christ our lord! so then, i myself in my mind am a slave to god’s law, but in my sinful nature a slave to the law of sin.
umbilical cord
striped eel.
the chicken is bled on the altar.
steep
therefore rejoice, you heavens and you who dwell in them! but woe to the earth and the sea, because the devil has gone down to you! he is filled with fury, because he knows that his time is short.”
first he said, "sacrifices and offerings, burnt offerings and sin offerings you did not desire, nor were you pleased with them" (although the law required them to be made).
the foolish ones said to the wise, ‘give us some of your oil; our lamps are going out.’
for moses said, ‘the lord your god will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your own people; you must listen to everything he tells you.
rebuke her because she’s always visiting
a kind of breadfruit
if [someone] goes pighunting and comes across a pig, the dog will bark at the pig.
as john’s disciples were leaving, jesus began to speak to the crowd about john: “what did you go out into the wilderness to see? a reed swayed by the wind?
to uproot, remove old camotes
simon peter, a servant and apostle of jesus christ, to those who through the righteousness of our god and savior jesus christ have received a faith as precious as ours:
affected by actions of someone else
"what is truth?" pilate asked. with this he went out again to the jews and said, "i find no basis for a charge against him.
sift the flour.
"we are not stoning you for any of these," replied the jews, "but for blasphemy, because you, a mere man, claim to be god."
for this is the time of punishment in fulfillment of all that has been written.
the great city split into three parts, and the cities of the nations collapsed. god remembered babylon the great and gave her the cup filled with the wine of the fury of his wrath.
cure or heal
when they had done so, they caught such a large number of fish that their nets began to break.
he sent them to bethlehem and said, “go and search carefully for the child. as soon as you find him, report to me, so that i too may go and worship him.”
jesus said to them, "the kings of the gentiles lord it over them; and those who exercise authority over them call themselves benefactors.
the people who were at the pool when their companion was drowning, they were stymied as to what to do in order to rescue
to give life (provide sustenance)
abandon
catch up
the servant fell on his knees before him. ‘be patient with me,’ he begged, ‘and i will pay back everything.’
slices prepared for cooking
vine
the sins of some are obvious, reaching the place of judgment ahead of them; the sins of others trail behind them.
to have a fiery temper; to be fierce or brave.
lift out
we, however, will not boast beyond proper limits, but will confine our boasting to the sphere of service god himself has assigned to us, a sphere that also includes you.
exhausted
“why then,” they asked, “did moses command that a man give his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away?”
clearing; atmosphere near the earth
and so upon you will come all the righteous blood that has been shed on earth, from the blood of righteous abel to the blood of zechariah son of berekiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar.
therefore, my brothers, be all the more eager to make your calling and election sure. for if you do these things, you will never fall,
shiny
a person who has chills feels cold because they have malaria.
but among you there must not be even a hint of sexual immorality, or of any kind of impurity, or of greed, because these are improper for god’s holy people.
even the ghosts, they moan because they are trying to scare us.
thunder without rain
if the tips of a carabao’s horns are white, people will not make a pet of it because they suppose that it will horn people.
adhere to
he has fulfilled for us, their children, by raising up jesus. as it is written in the second psalm: ‘you are my son; today i have become your father.’
i sent tychicus to ephesus.
on another sabbath he went into the synagogue and was teaching, and a man was there whose right hand was shriveled.
and again, when god brings his firstborn into the world, he says, “let all god’s angels worship him.”
consequently, just as one trespass resulted in condemnation for all people, so also one righteous act resulted in justification and life for all people.
as they approached jerusalem and came to bethphage on the mount of olives, jesus sent two disciples,
“i have revealed you to those whom you gave me out of the world. they were yours; you gave them to me and they have obeyed your word.”
one man ran, filled a sponge with wine vinegar, put it on a stick, and offered it to jesus to drink. "now leave him alone. let's see if elijah comes to take him down," he said.
it's on the shelf.
when the sawog fish comes next to us, it comes into our clear view.
david was shot.
to shake, as a house during an earthquake
esus did many other things as well. if every one of them were written down, i suppose that even the whole world would not have room for the books that would be written.
to pity, feel sorry for.
again he denied it. after a little while, those standing near said to peter, "surely you are one of them, for you are a galilean."
it is better, if it is god's will, to suffer for doing good than for doing evil.
but if christ is in you, then even though your body is subject to death because of sin, the spirit gives life because of righteousness.
the cat pounced on a lizard upon which it was preying as it likewise was preying on a cockroach.
and do not call anyone on earth ‘father,’ for you have one father, and he is in heaven.
the son of jesse, the son of obed, the son of boaz, the son of salmon, the son of nahshon,
as for the present-day people who have come later, there is a custom to have an outhouse for defecating and so that is the only place people will go to to defecate.
to taste
part of
the person is making a cap for his house so that it won't rain in.
a shallow faith
this was now the third time jesus appeared to his disciples after he was raised from the dead.
then they turned again to the blind man, “what have you to say about him? it was your eyes he opened.” the man replied, “he is a prophet.”
the kabugkul hawk/eagle is greedy for chicks.
"i have compassion for these people; they have already been with me three days and have nothing to eat.
when we were still children, we would throw a stone to the other side of the water [to find out] who had the strongest throw.
he, too, will drink of the wine of god's fury, which has been poured full strength into the cup of his wrath. he will be tormented with burning sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and of the lamb.
grace and peace be yours in abundance through the knowledge of god and of jesus our lord.
destination, or place to go to
lower down
they will turn their ears away from the truth and turn aside to myths.
lean past zenith
cough
this will result in your being witnesses to them.
but concerning israel he says, “all day long i have held out my hands to a disobedient and obstinate people.”
he asked, ‘how did you get in here without wedding clothes, friend?’ the man was speechless.
slither, as a snake or a creeping vine
when the daughter of herodias came in and danced, she pleased herod and his dinner guests.
to him who overcomes, i will give the right to sit with me on my throne, just as i overcame and sat down with my father on his throne.
it doesn't work to sift (lit. if one sifts) something wet because it would stick.
flyswatter made of rattan
so do not worry, saying, ‘what shall we eat?’ or ‘what shall we drink?’ or ‘what shall we wear?’
dip up
cut by directing blows at a slant to the surface
“we are witnesses of everything he did in the country of the jews and in jerusalem. they killed him by hanging him on a cross,
and among the lampstands was someone "like a son of man," dressed in a robe reaching down to his feet and with a golden sash around his chest.
rain in torrents, approaching rain
there is that which is good to envy, if what our companion is doing is good, that is what we will emulate.
but seek his kingdom, and these things will be given to you as well.
of
as for the children, they blow up the balloon so that it will become rounded as it inflates.
jude, a servant of jesus christ and a brother of james, to those who have been called, who are loved by god the father and kept by jesus christ:
after jesus had finished instructing his twelve disciples, he went on from there to teach and preach in the towns of galilee.
ground
hang around
and the way of peace they do not know.”
you foolish people! did not the one who made the outside make the inside also?
to make tentative plans to do something.
a pattern on carved combs
river near the agusan davao boundary.
i, john, your brother and companion in the suffering and kingdom and patient endurance that are ours in jesus, was on the island of patmos because of the word of god and the testimony of jesus.
if we make a shallow well on the beach, we place sand there so that the debris will be filtered out.
if the [other person] agrees, you will make the purchase transaction.
to tie together.
unripe; young, as of corn; immature.
drawstring
opening or doorway (not an entry into the house); to open the mouth.
because of the service by which you have proved yourselves, men will praise god for the obedience that accompanies your confession of the gospel of christ, and for your generosity in sharing with them and with everyone else.
jesus answered, “it is written: ‘worship the lord your god and serve him only.’”
if you acknowledge me as your companion, you also have acknowleged unisimu. the response to this is, “why shouldn't we acknowledge [him] when [he] is also our companion?”
whoever has will be given more; whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken from him."
and asked them, “did you receive the holy spirit when you believed?” they answered, “no, we have not even heard that there is a holy spirit.”
no, i beat my body and make it my slave so that after i have preached to others, i myself will not be disqualified for the prize.
as for us, we cannot help speaking about what we have seen and heard.”
a kind of camote (yellowish-red inside and out)
you brood of vipers, how can you who are evil say anything good? for the mouth speaks what the heart is full of.
sound of water splashing
run an errand
a person hesitates to speak because he is shy to talk to his companion if he has something he needs.
so the pharisees and teachers of the law asked jesus, "why don't your disciples live according to the tradition of the elders instead of eating their food with 'unclean' hands?"
cheap.
curved knife
jesus said, “let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.”
to make a channel or ditch.
pick it up with the cloth.
and on the highway, there is that which has been placed in the center which also glows.
extinguish
"but the tenants said to one another, 'this is the heir. come, let's kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.'
we may get poked
the evil spirit haunts.
a kind of small tree
a person nervously moves his foot but he is not itching; he is just moving it for no particular reason.
then the woman, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell at his feet and, trembling with fear, told him the whole truth.
kind of bird; killdeer, red-legged partridge, least sandpiper
as for that, it refers to different kinds of fish.
to be the recipients of an angry outburst
hill forested with tall trees
kind of red rice
some of the sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to jesus with a question.
through him we received grace and apostleship to call all the gentiles to the obedience that comes from faith for his name’s sake.
tip
when his accusers got up to speak, they did not charge him with any of the crimes i had expected.
going a little farther, he fell with his face to the ground and prayed, “my father, if it is possible, may this cup be taken from me. yet not as i will, but as you will.”
scaffolding is the temporary structure on which we stand when we build the body of a house.
now this is our boast: our conscience testifies that we have conducted ourselves in the world, and especially in our relations with you, in the holiness and sincerity that are from god. we have done so not according to worldly wisdom but according to god's grace.
so that through my being with you again your joy in christ jesus will overflow on account of me.
what reason do you give for this current theft of yours?
they all gave out of their wealth; but she, out of her poverty, put in everything--all she had to live on."
the day which will arrive, that is tomorrow.
leave them; they are blind guides. if the blind lead the blind, both will fall into a pit.”
surround, as with a fence
to decrease in size
when the raft happened to pass through the shallow area, the rattan with which it was tied together became chewed and was broken off by the rocks.
a felled tree; log.
the next day, when they came down from the mountain, a large crowd met him.
heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.
knowledge
king herod heard about this, for jesus' name had become well known. some were saying, "john the baptist has been raised from the dead, and that is why miraculous powers are at work in him."
succeed
if someone is fleeing, we pursue them so that we will catch up with them.
kindling wood
who enjoyed god’s favor and asked that he might provide a dwelling place for the god of jacob.
when we place something over the fire, we expose it to the heat of the fire so that it can be used for wrapping food.
“put your sword back in its place,” jesus said to him, “for all who draw the sword will die by the sword.
the disciples said, "see, lord, here are two swords." "that is enough," he replied.
even though there are difficulties in our life situations, yet we just trust them to god.
jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and when he found him, he said, "do you believe in the son of man?"
for you yourselves know how you ought to follow our example. we were not idle when we were with you,
choke, as of plants
but as he left, he promised, "i will come back if it is god's will." then he set sail from ephesus.
a lizard about 5 or 6 inches long which has a green back, light colored belly and brown tail.
and do this, understanding the present time. the hour has come for you to wake up from your slumber, because our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed.
he is not the god of the dead, but of the living, for to him all are alive."
where they got into a boat and set off across the lake for capernaum. by now it was dark, and jesus had not yet joined them.
the angel went to her and said, “greetings, you who are highly favored! the lord is with you.”
they all ate the same spiritual food
so then, dear friends, since you are looking forward to this, make every effort to be found spotless, blameless and at peace with him.
you have taken up the tabernacle of molek and the star of your god rephan, the idols you made to worship. therefore i will send you into exile’ beyond babylon.
they are not arranged yet
the man who had received five bags of gold brought the other five. ‘master,’ he said, ‘you entrusted me with five bags of gold. see, i have gained five more.’
just as strong
when they came to the border of mysia, they tried to enter bithynia, but the spirit of jesus would not allow them to.
cover or lid
i would indeed like to return to magimon, but i really won't.
this is the passage of scripture the eunuch was reading: “he was led like a sheep to the slaughter, and as a lamb before its shearer is silent, so he did not open his mouth.
large red biting ant (makes nests in trees, leaves, or ground)
i tell you that something greater than the temple is here.
gift for paternal grandparents upon presenting a child
their hair was messy from the rain.
pilate was surprised to hear that he was already dead. summoning the centurion, he asked him if jesus had already died.
a bodyguard.
he went through syria and cilicia, strengthening the churches.
remain living in the village
squeeze
for it is not the one who commends himself who is approved, but the one whom the lord commends.
to give attention to something
the fruit of the red pepper is hot when it is ripe.
the ones who say, andi-andì are those who are all girls who are playing.
day before yesterday
paul, an apostle of christ jesus by the will of god, to god’s holy people in ephesus, the faithful in christ jesus:
he who speaks on his own does so to gain honor for himself, but he who works for the honor of the one who sent him is a man of truth; there is nothing false about him.
the chief priests of the jews protested to pilate, "do not write 'the king of the jews,' but that this man claimed to be king of the jews."
but by the grace of god i am what i am, and his grace to me was not without effect. no, i worked harder than all of them--yet not i, but the grace of god that was with me.
as it is written: “there is no one righteous, not even one;
as for your old attitudes , don't add them onto  your new attitudes
give up on someone or something
so there was great joy in that city.
i say this as a concession, not as a command.
if a child becomes lame, one foot will draw up.
about three hours later his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.
we have chills when we are ill.
do not let anyone who delights in false humility and the worship of angels disqualify you for the prize. such a person goes into great detail about what he has seen, and his unspiritual mind puffs him up with idle notions.
then another sign appeared in heaven: an enormous red dragon with seven heads and ten horns and seven crowns on its heads.
i am the living one; i was dead, and now look, i am alive for ever and ever! and i hold the keys of death and hades.
then jesus came to them and said, “all authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me.
suppose one of you has a servant plowing or looking after the sheep. will he say to the servant when he comes in from the field, ‘come along now and sit down to eat’?
a human being
but when this priest had offered for all time one sacrifice for sins, he sat down at the right hand of god.
as he was praying, the appearance of his face changed, and his clothes became as bright as a flash of lightning.
so they passed by mysia and went down to troas.
so they asked him, “who is this fellow who told you to pick it up and walk?”
therefore, there is now no condemnation for those who are in christ jesus,
aware of this, jesus said to them, “why are you bothering this woman? she has done a beautiful thing to me.
name of a creek (southern mansalinaw village)
and if a revelation comes to someone who is sitting down, the first speaker should stop.
as for soup/gravy in which starch has been added, it will become lumpy if it is not stirred.
after they had been severely flogged, they were thrown into prison, and the jailer was commanded to guard them carefully.
to fluff (feathers)
christmas
and i saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. another book was opened, which is the book of life. the dead were judged according to what they had done as recorded in the books. the sea gave up the dead that were in it, and death and hades gave up the dead that were in them, and each person was judged according to what he had done.
tightly braid three, four, or six strands
as for the person who easily becomes frustrated, his thoughts are short and he quickly becomes agitated and angry.
to cut up in pieces by directing blows at right angles to the wood; to split wood
still other seed fell on good soil. it came up, grew and produced a crop, multiplying thirty, sixty, or even a hundred times."
put pressure
beg camotes from apusow.
this is what we speak, not in words taught us by human wisdom but in words taught by the spirit, expressing spiritual truths in spiritual words.
on the lord’s day i was in the spirit, and i heard behind me a loud voice like a trumpet,
but they did not find any, though many false witnesses came forward. finally two came forward
two blind men were sitting by the roadside, and when they heard that jesus was going by, they shouted, “lord, son of david, have mercy on us!”
if anyone will not welcome you or listen to your words, leave that home or town and shake the dust off your feet.
it would be better for them to be thrown into the sea with a millstone tied around their neck than to cause one of these little ones to stumble.
to shred
lie on one’s stomach
many will say to me on that day, ‘lord, lord, did we not prophesy in your name and in your name drive out demons and in your name perform many miracles?’
i planned to visit you on my way to macedonia and to come back to you from macedonia, and then to have you send me on my way to judea.
for he was looking forward to the city with foundations, whose architect and builder is god.
they called out, asking if simon who was known as peter was staying there.
the inside of a dug-out canoe is hollowed out as it is made.
faded in color
"about jesus of nazareth," they replied. "he was a prophet, powerful in word and deed before god and all the people. the chief priests and our rulers handed him over to be sentenced to death, and they crucified him;
these men are grumblers and faultfinders; they follow their own evil desires; they boast about themselves and flatter others for their own advantage.
the word became flesh and made his dwelling among us. we have seen his glory, the glory of the one and only son, who came from the father, full of grace and truth.
nearby stood six stone water jars, the kind used by the jews for ceremonial washing, each holding from twenty to thirty gallons.
as for a side stream of a river, there is an outlet downstream.
silenced
but everything exposed by the light becomes visible—and everything that is illuminated becomes a light.
shave off hair or feathers using a knife, razor, or sharp object
hen we were still children, we played with each other long ago and we said, “let's make make-believe rats, and so we will strike the upper arms of our companions.”
a pig makes a bed for a place where she will give birth.
rap or tap with one’s hand or a bolo
for, “whoever would love life and see good days must keep their tongue from evil and their lips from deceitful speech.
to submit to such as these and to everyone who joins in the work, and labors at it.
if we love our neighbors (lit. companion), they will also love us.
village, barrio, or its inhabitants
that is the person who is able to touch the bottom of a deep [pool].
what we sew won’t finished.
for god has put it into their hearts to accomplish his purpose by agreeing to give the beast their power to rule, until god's words are fulfilled.
" 'go to this people and say, "you will be ever hearing but never understanding; you will be ever seeing but never perceiving."
when crabs are wrapped in a leaf, we tie them up securely by wrapping a vine around them several times.
go around in circles
inside or hold of a boat or dugout canoe
but they did not understand what this meant. it was hidden from them, so that they did not grasp it, and they were afraid to ask him about it.
sow seed by casting
to be effective.
he looked around at them in anger and, deeply distressed at their stubborn hearts, said to the man, "stretch out your hand." he stretched it out, and his hand was completely restored.
bridle or halter as of a horse or carabao
white material
for many to approach someone
root or foot of a tree trunk; buttocks; downstream end of a raft
when we plant something such as seedlings, then we will do the planting carefully.
i, me (1st person singular)
jesus withdrew with his disciples to the lake, and a large crowd from galilee followed. when they heard all he was doing, many people came to him from judea, jerusalem, idumea, and the regions across the jordan and around tyre and sidon.
no temptation has seized you except what is common to man. and god is faithful; he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear. but when you are tempted, he will also provide a way out so that you can stand up under it.
morning star
if someone desires to get married, he will pursue it. he will continuously discuss it with the father [of the girl] until he agrees.
what did he mean when he said, 'you will look for me, but you will not find me,' and 'where i am, you cannot come'?"
a chicken egg which is underdeveloped won't hatch because it has not matured.
and levi got up, left everything and followed him.
the person who was blind whom jesus treated and then he was able to see, it was like an amazing thing because jesus did some miraculous.
then saul, who was also called paul, filled with the holy spirit, looked straight at elymas and said,
i'm going to choose a house to live in.
jesus said to him, "today salvation has come to this house, because this man, too, is a son of abraham.
and we are sending along with him the brother who is praised by all the churches for his service to the gospel.
name of a disease of fish
when they had crucified him, they divided up his clothes by casting lots.
cough up
and whoever wants to be first must be slave of all.
when evening came, jesus was reclining at the table with the twelve.
strip
why, you do not even know what will happen tomorrow. what is your life? you are a mist that appears for a little while and then vanishes.
when he saw peter and john about to go into the temple, he asked them for money.
if anyone causes one of these little ones—those who believe in me—to stumble, it would be better for them to have a large millstone hung around their neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea.
there will be great earthquakes, famines and pestilences in various places, and fearful events and great signs from heaven.
the commander ordered paul to be taken into the barracks. he directed that he be flogged and questioned in order to find out why the people were shouting at him like this.
lie on one’s back
an argument started among the disciples as to which of them would be the greatest.
when we have guests, when the food is served, we get it started by saying, "friend, let’s eat now." we are inviting him to come and eat.
for god did not give us a spirit of timidity, but a spirit of power, of love and of self-discipline.
because they could not bear what was commanded: "if even an animal touches the mountain, it must be stoned."
when we pick food from our teeth, we remove that which is dirty from our teeth
remember
kind of small bird.
therefore, rid yourselves of all malice and all deceit, hypocrisy, envy, and slander of every kind.
father
then he gave abraham the covenant of circumcision. and abraham became the father of isaac and circumcised him eight days after his birth. later isaac became the father of jacob, and jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs.
from the time that john was born, god was in his heart because he [god] was the one who determined that john should be born.
it doesn't burn if there is a field with many pogul trees.
it takes us a long time to arrive because we have to detour .
then the pharisees went out and began to plot with the herodians how they might kill jesus.
for in the same way you judge others, you will be judged, and with the measure you use, it will be measured to you.
for scripture says to pharaoh: “i raised you up for this very purpose, that i might display my power in you and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth.”
‘no,’ they replied, ‘there may not be enough for both us and you. instead, go to those who sell oil and buy some for yourselves.’
then he ordered his disciples not to tell anyone that he was the messiah.
the man who had received two bags of gold also came. ‘master,’ he said, ‘you entrusted me with two bags of gold. see, i have gained two more.’
if you are insulted because of the name of christ, you are blessed, for the spirit of glory and of god rests on you.
to go around something
the commandments, “you shall not commit adultery,” “you shall not murder,” “you shall not steal,” “you shall not covet,” and whatever other command there may be, are summed up in this one command: “love your neighbor as yourself.”
a voice came from the cloud, saying, “this is my son, whom i have chosen; listen to him.”
capture
large red biting ant (makes nests in trees, leaves, or ground)
the lamps which just use kerosine, they are easily extinguished by wind.
water
expensive
for who is greater, the one who is at the table or the one who serves? is it not the one who is at the table? but i am among you as one who serves.
jesus replied: “‘love the lord your god with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind.’
muddy.
jesus is ‘the stone you builders rejected, which has become the cornerstone.’  salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to mankind by which we must be saved.”
the sack will bump into and won’t go through if the doorways are too narrow.
slices prepared for cooking
citrus fruit
jesus returned to galilee in the power of the spirit, and news about him spread through the whole countryside.
when we play ball, we leap up as we throw the ball.
whose
rash, such as from heat
and while they still did not believe it because of joy and amazement, he asked them, "do you have anything here to eat?"
the flesh and bones of the tail of animals or reptiles.
a spirit believed to govern the camote and sugarcane crops.
that clay soil is red and malleable. it is used to make clay pots.
leave a remnant, not use up everything
maybe, perhaps
jesus found a young donkey and sat on it, as it is written:
the wife does not have authority over her own body but yields it to her husband. in the same way, the husband does not have authority over his own body but yields it to his wife.
hen’s warning cackle when disturbed while nesting
greet apelles, whose fidelity to christ has stood the test. greet those who belong to the household of aristobulus.
even from your own number men will arise and distort the truth in order to draw away disciples after them.
to clear an area around a field in order to keep wild pigs out
when we go downriver by raft, when we return we pull the gakit in going upriver against the current.
sediment free
so i will cast her on a bed of suffering, and i will make those who commit adultery with her suffer intensely, unless they repent of her ways.
when the angel who spoke to him had gone, cornelius called two of his servants and a devout soldier who was one of his attendants.
water
whether it is a person who has a spouse or an unmarried lady, he lusts after all [of them].
however, as it is written: "no eye has seen, no ear has heard, no mind has conceived what god has prepared for those who love him" --
cut off.
we offend people
to smile or laugh with one's mouth closed, not showing teeth
infrequently, seldom, rarely
and there appeared before them elijah and moses, who were talking with jesus.
if anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
jesus knew their thoughts and said to them: "any kingdom divided against itself will be ruined, and a house divided against itself will fall. if satan is divided against himself, how can his kingdom stand? i say this because you claim that i drive out demons by beelzebub.
but you, keep your head in all situations, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelist, discharge all the duties of your ministry.
a little later someone else saw him and said, "you also are one of them." "man, i am not!" peter replied.
or do you think scripture says without reason that the spirit he caused to live in us envies intensely?
then i heard a voice telling me, ‘get up, peter. kill and eat.’
there is something which they burn as a means of treatment to remove that love charm.
for christ did not send me to baptize, but to preach the gospel--not with words of human wisdom, lest the cross of christ be emptied of its power.
now if a child can be circumcised on the sabbath so that the law of moses may not be broken, why are you angry with me for healing the whole man on the sabbath?
to initiate (growth or process)
he began by saying to them, “today this scripture is fulfilled in your hearing.”
when one takes leave, they let someone know that they are going now.
two people will race [each other] to return home.
neither do we go beyond our limits by boasting of work done by others. our hope is that, as your faith continues to grow, our sphere of activity among you will greatly expand,
hook onto
a kind of mottled rice.
and he took it and ate it in their presence.
i put this in human terms because you are weak in your natural selves. just as you used to offer the parts of your body in slavery to impurity and to everincreasing wickedness, so now offer them in slavery to righteousness leading to holiness.
at this the man's face fell. he went away sad, because he had great wealth.
then the dragon was enraged at the woman and went off to make war against the rest of her offspring--those who obey god's commandments and hold to the testimony of jesus
the soldiers twisted together a crown of thorns and put it on his head. they clothed him in a purple robe
when we look at the date of a month, we need to reserve a time when nothing conflicts so that the gathering together will happen.
"i have compassion for these people; they have already been with me three days and have nothing to eat.
confront.
if we get a thorn in our foot, we will pick it out with a needle so that the thorn will be removed.
we may get poked
now hagar stands for mount sinai in arabia and corresponds to the present city of jerusalem, because she is in slavery with her children.
on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and they were going to name him after his father zechariah,
if we move to another country, we are just aliens.
when a person defecates, the fecal material passes through the anus.
smoke out bees
lymph nodes, also sublingual glands
many people, because they had heard that he had performed this sign, went out to meet him.
wide-eyed
to tease
the pots clanged as they hit each other.
stain; transfer color
index finger or toe.
if we inadvertently brush against the table as we pass, it is jostled because it was moved
stick
have nothing to do with the fruitless deeds of darkness, but rather expose them.
extended rainy spell
but wisdom is proved right by all her children.”
intensity (such as of throbbing pain)
follower, or subject of someone
the apostles gathered around jesus and reported to him all they had done and taught.
if someone wants to get married, he will pursue it relentlessly. he will constantly discuss it with the father until he says yes.
squeeze past others, as in a crowd
for god said, ‘honor your father and mother’ and ‘anyone who curses their father or mother must be put to death.’
a person who is walking, he/she continually walks vigorously.
call me.
be ashamed
on the lord’s day i was in the spirit, and i heard behind me a loud voice like a trumpet,
after the festival was over, while his parents were returning home, the boy jesus stayed behind in jerusalem, but they were unaware of it.
filth (especially dirt sticking to sweat)
and whatever you do, whether in word or deed, do it all in the name of the lord jesus, giving thanks to god the father through him.
intentionally break off
lame, crippled in the legs
we are going back and forth while passing through the village
to decrease
we will plant camote stems today because we have burned our fields.
there is neither jew nor gentile, neither slave nor free, nor is there male and female, for you are all one in christ jesus.
"on one of these journeys i was going to damascus with the authority and commission of the chief priests.
they worship me in vain; their teachings are but rules taught by men.'
the day which will arrive, that is tomorrow.
rude, unmannerly, vulgar girl.
the rice which is being sunned is being caused to dry.
middle finger.
he’s always laughing because he has no companions.
he, too, will drink of the wine of god's fury, which has been poured full strength into the cup of his wrath. he will be tormented with burning sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and of the lamb.
no longer
when we plant corn, we get a snall basket in which to put the rice and we strap it here at [our] waist.
the camote has been chewed by a rat
a store
if anyone has material possessions and sees his brother in need but has no pity on him, how can the love of god be in him?
very tired
the water is returning to its place; receding
peter turned and saw that the disciple whom jesus loved was following them. (this was the one who had leaned back against jesus at the supper and had said, “lord, who is going to betray you?”)
then peter said, “surely no one can stand in the way of their being baptized with water. they have received the holy spirit just as we have.”
that one.
to curse someone
repair
nervously move one's foot
then the man got up and went home.
in my father's house are many rooms; if it were not so, i would have told you. i am going there to prepare a place for you.
"you are not yet fifty years old," the jews said to him, "and you have seen abraham!"
do not take revenge, my friends, but leave room for god's wrath, for it is written: "it is mine to avenge; i will repay," says the lord.
for if the inheritance depends on the law, then it no longer depends on the promise; but god in his grace gave it to abraham through a promise.
just yesterday my horse gave birth.
but peter followed him at a distance, right up to the courtyard of the high priest. he entered and sat down with the guards to see the outcome.
when the twin-engine airplane flies, its wheels retract.
“but our ancestors refused to obey him. instead, they rejected him and in their hearts turned back to egypt.
well then, you should have put my money on deposit with the bankers, so that when i returned i would have received it back with interest.
have mouth open to be feed,
he has a wife on each arm.
for i am with you, and no one is going to attack and harm you, because i have many people in this city.”
you won't be able to take it until there is something to use as a guarantee which makes the agreement about when you will pay the remainder.
to bubble
whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe stands condemned already because they have not believed in the name of god’s one and only son.
because of your partnership in the gospel from the first day until now,
the tree by the water is leaning over. its tip is upside down.
pick
twenty
small nut from a type of rattan which is chewed with betelnut.
"woe to you, because you are like unmarked graves, which men walk over without knowing it."
for, "all men are like grass, and all their glory is like the flowers of the field; the grass withers and the flowers fall,
see to it that you do not refuse him who speaks. if they did not escape when they refused him who warned them on earth, how much less will we, if we turn away from him who warns us from heaven?
the king rose, and with him the governor and bernice and those sitting with them.
but they did not find any, though many false witnesses came forward. finally two came forward
he said to them, "do you bring in a lamp to put it under a bowl or a bed? instead, don't you put it on its stand?
he replied, "go tell that fox, 'i will drive out demons and heal people today and tomorrow, and on the third day i will reach my goal.'
strong, powerful
for god does not show favoritism.
motor; generator; sewing machine
in fact, no one can enter a strong man's house and carry off his possessions unless he first ties up the strong man. then he can rob his house.
their bodies are [destructively] affected [by what they do]
paul, silas and timothy, to the church of the thessalonians in god the father and the lord jesus christ: grace and peace to you.
we’ll leave early in the morning.
all the saints send you greetings, especially those who belong to caesar's household.
fifty
the lake that is dammed up, has no outlet
give two things together
the one who was affected [by his action] -- was directed at -- was her husband who was murdered.
the person who was blind whom jesus treated and then he was able to see, it was like an amazing thing because jesus did some miraculous.
and so i tell you, every kind of sin and slander can be forgiven, but blasphemy against the spirit will not be forgiven.
trigger
then he called the crowd to him along with his disciples and said: "if anyone would come after me, he must deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.
to whom be glory for ever and ever. amen.
a man ought not to cover his head, since he is the image and glory of god; but woman is the glory of man.
as for that being frustrated, she was definitely not at peace.
forearm
a strong wind was blowing and the waters grew rough.
so go to the street corners and invite to the banquet anyone you find.’
he took the blind man by the hand and led him outside the village. when he had spit on the man's eyes and put his hands on him, jesus asked, "do you see anything?"
straight
at that time jesus went through the grainfields on the sabbath. his disciples were hungry and began to pick some heads of grain and eat them.
agreement
my nylon cord fell from the table and became tangled because it became dishevelled because it came off of the spool.
and if your right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off and throw it away. it is better for you to lose one part of your body than for your whole body to go into hell.
the horse which is being treated, with something to make him fierce, he becomes like the creatures which are likewise fierce.
to obstruct
to be dispirited, weak, or depressed
there is a child whose teeth are far apart. his teeth have spaces between them.
and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.”
roll eyes
he looked around at them all, and then said to the man, “stretch out your hand.” he did so, and his hand was completely restored.
transparent
go away for a period to allow for choice
he was faithful to the one who appointed him, just as moses was faithful in all god’s house.
the sharp edge of a knife
when jesus saw their faith, he said, “friend, your sins are forgiven.”
commend someone on their good behavior.
do not merely listen to the word, and so deceive yourselves. do what it says.
about
to shrivel up
an angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him.
for as i walked around and looked carefully at your objects of worship, i even found an altar with this inscription: to an unknown god.
a whole sack each.
he who does not love me will not obey my teaching. these words you hear are not my own; they belong to the father who sent me.
climb around on branches or logs
that which is given; gift
a kind of short woman’s bolo.
bright yellow bird
lance the boil so the pus can escape.
shoulder blade
"woe to you, because you build tombs for the prophets, and it was your forefathers who killed them.
the person who sows rice seed in his field just sows it evenly so that it will all be the same and there will be none sown thickly.
remove water from a pool to catch fish
the base of a mountain where the incline begins
the fish are being trapped by impeding the flow of the water.
when evening came, jesus arrived with the twelve.
as he began the settlement, a man who owed him ten thousand bags of gold was brought to him.
very itchy skin disease
saw some of his disciples eating food with hands that were "unclean," that is, unwashed.
when you have all of your payment [in hand], you can take the horse.
shredded abaca fiber (hemp)
i didn’t know that one
to have something thrown at oneself, as when playing dodge ball
cut out the knot.
to whisper.
they said, "is this not jesus, the son of joseph, whose father and mother we know? how can he now say, 'i came down from heaven'?"
then some pharisees and teachers of the law came to jesus from jerusalem and asked,
he of whom these things are said belonged to a different tribe, and no one from that tribe has ever served at the altar. for it is clear that our lord descended from judah, and in regard to that tribe moses said nothing about priests.
small crab
to make a decision about something; be controlled by someone or something
we had a saw which was an instrument for cutting off roofing.
own
they discussed this among themselves and said, “it is because we didn’t bring any bread.”
a metal band reinforcing a bolo handle or spear shaft
take a knee-chest position, turn bottom-up
from the blood of abel to the blood of zechariah, who was killed between the altar and the sanctuary. yes, i tell you, this generation will be held responsible for it all.
our
eat up
pound rice with someone
the people read it and were glad for its encouraging message.
signal or point using lips
plead for mercy
wear hair long
as for the person, he felt his house shake when he slashed the python.
because there is one loaf, we, who are many, are one body, for we all partake of the one loaf.
from whom every family in heaven and on earth derives its name.
and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven, by making peace through his blood, shed on the cross.
questioned him, “why then do you baptize if you are not the messiah, nor elijah, nor the prophet?”
if, then, demetrius and his fellow craftsmen have a grievance against anybody, the courts are open and there are proconsuls. they can press charges.
ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you.
stone.
he also told them this parable: “can the blind lead the blind? will they not both fall into a pit?
we are just temporary residents here on the earth.
but after the disciples had gathered around him, he got up and went back into the city. the next day he and barnabas left for derbe.
i would like to learn just one thing from you: did you receive the spirit by the works of the law, or by believing what you heard?
son-in-law
does not the potter have the right to make out of the same lump of clay some pottery for special purposes and some for common use?
i know a man in christ who fourteen years ago was caught up to the third heaven. whether it was in the body or out of the body i do not know—god knows.
i’ll let the camotes leaf out.
peer
so i strive always to keep my conscience clear before god and man.
you then, my son, be strong in the grace that is in christ jesus.
he’s a child who doesn’t stop
therefore keep watch, because you do not know on what day your lord will come.
if the ground is on a downward incline, the water will inadvertently flow.
labor of childbirth
now hagar stands for mount sinai in arabia and corresponds to the present city of jerusalem, because she is in slavery with her children.
gather together to talk about something.
altar of rattan leaves
glance
now for the matters you wrote about: it is good for a man not to marry.
"when he came to his senses, he said, 'how many of my father's hired men have food to spare, and here i am starving to death!
frying pan
when we are ill, [we] just expend great effort to get up. that is [the meaning] of managing because we force ourselves to do something
when the lamb opened the fourth seal, i heard the voice of the fourth living creature say, “come!”
preserve raw meat by placing it in a bamboo tube
we know that god does not listen to sinners. he listens to the godly man who does his will.
"he who is not with me is against me, and he who does not gather with me, scatters.
startled
clarify what you said
treat well, be kind
his speech persuaded them. they called the apostles in and had them flogged. then they ordered them not to speak in the name of jesus, and let them go.
leaving the next day, we reached caesarea and stayed at the house of philip the evangelist, one of the seven.
although i hope to come to you soon, i am writing you these instructions so that,
flick off an insect
let us draw near to god with a sincere heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled to cleanse us from a guilty conscience and having our bodies washed with pure water.
a kind of breadfruit
but if a widow has children or grandchildren, these should learn first of all to put their religion into practice by caring for their own family and so repaying their parents and grandparents, for this is pleasing to god.
fly away
at that, paul left the council.
he was in the assembly in the wilderness, with the angel who spoke to him on mount sinai, and with our ancestors; and he received living words to pass on to us.
jesus came, took the bread and gave it to them, and did the same with the fish.
he said to him, ‘if they do not listen to moses and the prophets, they will not be convinced even if someone rises from the dead.’”
then they will go away to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.”
breath
as for the person who has many visible veins, his veins can be seen because they protrude.
when simon saw that the spirit was given at the laying on of the apostles’ hands, he offered them money
to be carried by two people
prep by
even us, whom he also called, not only from the jews but also from the gentiles?
philip, like andrew and peter, was from the town of bethsaida.
harvest
if we experience swelling which has not yet burst, our lymph nodes here in our groin will hurt.
keep a store
loneliness.
cast all your anxiety on him because he cares for you.
when [an area] has been cut and [the trees] sprout again and after a long time the trees become old, it has become a secondary forest.
but he took her by the hand and said, “my child, get up!”
send back
“the voice spoke from heaven a second time, ‘do not call anything impure that god has made clean.’
i looked, and there before me was a pale horse! its rider was named death, and hades was following close behind him. they were given power over a fourth of the earth to kill by sword, famine and plague, and by the wild beasts of the earth.
in that hour jesus said to the crowd, “am i leading a rebellion, that you have come out with swords and clubs to capture me? every day i sat in the temple courts teaching, and you did not arrest me.
they answered as jesus had told them to, and the people let them go.
when someone sings oggung style, the one who sings to an accompaniment is the same one who plays the saluroy instrument.
ankle
here he is, speaking publicly, and they are not saying a word to him. have the authorities really concluded that he is the christ ?
follow closely, walk single file
good or bad omen.
pretend
for kings and all those in authority, that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness.
has no one returned to give praise to god except this foreigner?”
a person who was strong with little time elapse, he was able to finish his field.
be hesitant to do something
key.
just bring the fragrant soap.
vines that hang from trees
never again will they hunger; never again will they thirst. the sun will not beat upon them, nor any scorching heat.
paul acknowledged his [role as] slave to jesus because he had become his servant.
we felt his foot.
then another sign appeared in heaven: an enormous red dragon with seven heads and ten horns and seven crowns on its heads.
banlak went down to the sea.
when we are in a good relationship with our companions, if there is a small problem, it will be quickly resolved.
speak and act as those who are going to be judged by the law that gives freedom,
meanwhile, when a crowd of many thousands had gathered, so that they were trampling on one another, jesus began to speak first to his disciples, saying: "be on your guard against the yeast of the pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
converse, discuss.
when they heard this sound, a crowd came together in bewilderment, because each one heard their own language being spoken.
when he was alone, the twelve and the others around him asked him about the parables.
you (2nd person plural, topic pronoun)
"you do not want to leave too, do you?" jesus asked the twelve.
hold hands, lead by holding someone's hand
we plop down as a child who is just learning to walk or an adult who is weak or dizzy.
jesus said to him, “shall i come and heal him?”
your beauty should not come from outward adornment, such as braided hair and the wearing of gold jewelry and fine clothes.
you are able to believe something when you know about it.
the leader of a village has political power because he is able to give orders.
the sins of some are obvious, reaching the place of judgment ahead of them; the sins of others trail behind them.
to puff up or regain shape (as a cushion)
cross piece for raft
the person who is unhesitant goes ahead and states his purpose.
"you heard me say, 'i am going away and i am coming back to you.' if you loved me, you would be glad that i am going to the father, for the father is greater than i.
to retrieve
to open their eyes and turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of satan to god, so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a place among those who are sanctified by faith in me.'
now we pray to god that you will not do anything wrong—not so that people will see that we have stood the test but so that you will do what is right even though we may seem to have failed.
pinkish wood used for spears
withered, such as beans or seeds
remain undeveloped, as a runt
pull the blouse on over my head.
they asked him, “then who are you? are you elijah?” he said, “i am not.” “are you the prophet?” he answered, “no.”
"show me a denarius. whose portrait and inscription are on it?"
when it rains, we break/cut off leaves for a head covering.
rescue
"blessed is the king who comes in the name of the lord!" "peace in heaven and glory in the highest!"
that which turns into the agkud staple is buried in the ground for two days. it sours/forments but it is sweet.
he redeemed us in order that the blessing given to abraham might come to the gentiles through christ jesus, so that by faith we might receive the promise of the spirit.
lame
a kind of rattan
in the hope that i may somehow arouse my own people to envy and save some of them.
tree stump
they will throw dust on their heads, and with weeping and mourning cry out: " 'woe! woe, o great city, where all who had ships on the sea became rich through her wealth! in one hour she has been brought to ruin!
for the one who was a slave when called to faith in the lord is the lord’s freed person; similarly, the one who was free when called is christ’s slave.
some time ago
a banana which is cooked which is called allaba. granaba is the visayan name.
frustrated
homosexual activity whether all women or all men.
and jesus grew in wisdom and stature, and in favor with god and man.
so they hurried off and found mary and joseph, and the baby, who was lying in the manger.
because he loves our nation and has built our synagogue.”
therefore confess your sins to each other and pray for each other so that you may be healed. the prayer of a righteous man is powerful and effective.
rays
whenever
to move something out of the way
give me [some] soap.
when did we see you a stranger and invite you in, or needing clothes and clothe you?
fitting
now there was a man named joseph, a member of the council, a good and upright man,
black tick
consider abraham: "he believed god, and it was credited to him as righteousness."
let out or escape
for there are many rebellious people, mere talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision group.
he doesn't want someone to take [some of the rambatans].
on the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, when it was customary to sacrifice the passover lamb, jesus' disciples asked him, "where do you want us to go and make preparations for you to eat the passover?"
there a centurion’s servant, whom his master valued highly, was sick and about to die.
black, rotten teeth
saying: “amen! praise and glory and wisdom and thanks and honor and power and strength be to our god for ever and ever. amen!”
what do you prefer? shall i come to you with a whip, or in love and with a gentle spirit?
all the law and the prophets hang on these two commandments.”
a person whose eye gets something in it cannot open his eye.
but the gift is not like the trespass. for if the many died by the trespass of the one man, how much more did god’s grace and the gift that came by the grace of the one man, jesus christ, overflow to the many!
whether paul or apollos or cephas or the world or life or death or the present or the future--all are yours,
solomon the father of rehoboam, rehoboam the father of abijah, abijah the father of asa,
the monkey fell in the water
the creeks which have become shallow pools, we remove the water until it dries up and then we can catch the fish [and other edible water creatures].
the governor read the letter and asked what province he was from. learning that he was from cilicia,
to plant
be stubborn
(the rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were ended.) this is the first resurrection.
fruit of the polì tree, small and round with leathery skin.
cartilage appendage to ribs
tease
the apostles were brought in and made to appear before the sanhedrin to be questioned by the high priest.
to this he replied: “brothers and fathers, listen to me! the god of glory appeared to our father abraham while he was still in mesopotamia, before he lived in harran.
the person who builds a house always pounds nail(s ) with a hammer.
to come alive (fire)
the male monkey, that is the leader of a group of monkeys.
they kept the matter to themselves, discussing what "rising from the dead" meant.
a kind of black rice.
a teeter-totter.
but as surely as god is faithful, our message to you is not "yes" and "no."
for i do not want you to be ignorant of the fact, brothers and sisters, that our ancestors were all under the cloud and that they all passed through the sea.
i didn’t know that one
if we are not entangled by sufferings..
to be self-controlled and pure, to be busy at home, to be kind, and to be subject to their husbands, so that no one will malign the word of god.
therefore do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. each day has enough trouble of its own.
suddenly jesus met them. “greetings,” he said. they came to him, clasped his feet and worshiped him.
you say, 'i am rich; i have acquired wealth and do not need a thing.' but you do not realize that you are wretched, pitiful, poor, blind and naked.
follow after someone because of being worried about their welfare.
whiskers
please
a torch
who had come to hear him and to be healed of their diseases. those troubled by impure spirits were cured,
when we heard this, we and the people there pleaded with paul not to go up to jerusalem.
profuse
when the boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
some of them, however, men from cyprus and cyrene, went to antioch and began to speak to greeks also, telling them the good news about the lord jesus.
when jesus said, “i am he,” they drew back and fell to the ground.
do not be misled: "bad company corrupts good character."
and said, “give me also this ability so that everyone on whom i lay my hands may receive the holy spirit.”
when a person who is dying goes into a coma, he is unaware when we try to arouse him.
because he himself suffered when he was tempted, he is able to help those who are being tempted
"it is one of the twelve," he replied, "one who dips bread into the bowl with me.
what agreement is there between the temple of god and idols? for we are the temple of the living god. as god has said: "i will live with them and walk among them, and i will be their god, and they will be my people."
jesus went throughout galilee, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and healing every disease and sickness among the people.
so do not be ashamed to testify about our lord, or ashamed of me his prisoner. but join with me in suffering for the gospel, by the power of god,
that’s enough.
he said to them, "when you pray, say: " 'father, hallowed be your name, your kingdom come.
but many who saw them leaving recognized them and ran on foot from all the towns and got there ahead of them.
meet on the way from different directions
that is why it is called the field of blood to this day.
soft
when the sweet potato field has become old, we remove the old sweet potato vines and then we allow the sweet potatoes to grow back as they sprout new sweet potato vines.
small bag with a drawstring for carrying items
the snake which goes inside a hole, it also pulls back and inside its hole.
if the tongue is clamped down on, it can be severed.
“i have other sheep that are not of this sheep pen. i must bring them also. they too will listen to my voice, and there shall be one flock and one shepherd.”
shortly before dawn jesus went out to them, walking on the lake.
forest plant
when the airplane lands in maambago, many people come to find out what guests have arrived.
praying mantis
to find someone at home.
we reinforce the braces of a shield by tying them so that they will be strong.
result
the person who is purchasing an axe, he will be slow in looking because the one that is best , [that is the one] he will buy.
every day they continued to meet together in the temple courts. they broke bread in their homes and ate together with glad and sincere hearts,
when evening came, many who were demon-possessed were brought to him, and he drove out the spirits with a word and healed all the sick.
if we are burning a field and the wind is strong, there will be a lot of embers that leap up and over to another mountain, which will also catch fire.
the people will be silenced
love charm
break through
estimate the length.
“how then were your eyes opened?” they asked.
world
if the place where our companion lives is far away, and if i would have liked to visit, it will be too far for me to go. i won’t be able to manage to go to that place because it is too far.
have chills from malaria or dengue fever
sleek, as fur
when there is a tree which moves there in the rapids that is a tree that is moved by the current.
"whoever welcomes one of these little children in my name welcomes me; and whoever welcomes me does not welcome me but the one who sent me."
then they remembered his words.
slit
the meaning is uncluttered, straight and our understanding [of the words] is clear.
spokesperson or representative of a higher leader
(with the payment he received for his wickedness, judas bought a field; there he fell headlong, his body burst open and all his intestines spilled out.
we all
he had been instructed in the way of the lord, and he spoke with great fervor and taught about jesus accurately, though he knew only the baptism of john.
small house lizard
for, "the earth is the lord's, and everything in it."
become unconscious; coma
not so with you. instead, whoever wants to become great among you must be your servant,
will not the ministry of the spirit be even more glorious?
then barnabas went to tarsus to look for saul,
to go over there (within sight)
and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven, by making peace through his blood, shed on the cross.
when tempted, no one should say, "god is tempting me." for god cannot be tempted by evil, nor does he tempt anyone;
leaving nazareth, he went and lived in capernaum, which was by the lake in the area of zebulun and naphtali—
as for a  person, [he] teaches good conduct to his offspring.
peeling, as the outermost layer of a kernel of corn, a bean, skin of a pig, or from flesh that was blistered
very good; made very well
type of bush with wide leaves
then he fell on his knees and cried out, “lord, do not hold this sin against them.” when he had said this, he fell asleep.
indeed, you are our glory and joy.
then jesus cried out, "when a man believes in me, he does not believe in me only, but in the one who sent me.
peter answered: “may your money perish with you, because you thought you could buy the gift of god with money!
strain
every tree that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
scar.
you make your talk consistent with ours.
for the meaning of something to be clear
the dog is digging because he is relentlessly pursuing a rat there in a hole in the ground. someone says, “what is that dog after?
material used for making mats.
he said to them, “therefore every teacher of the law who has become a disciple in the kingdom of heaven is like the owner of a house who brings out of his storeroom new treasures as well as old.”
that which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked at and our hands have touched-- this we proclaim concerning the word of life.
when jesus saw their faith, he said, “friend, your sins are forgiven.”
even now the one who reaps draws a wage and harvests a crop for eternal life, so that the sower and the reaper may be glad together.
when the pig has been cooked, they strip the meat from the bone which still has meat; they cut off every bit of meat from the bone until bone is all that is left.
joaquin is still the one who has the authority of being the captain of barangay gupitan.
anyone who rejected the law of moses died without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses.
he must become greater; i must become less.”
understand, then, that those who have faith are children of abraham.
when one of those at the table with him heard this, he said to jesus, "blessed is the man who will e
it will not be like the covenant i made with their forefathers when i took them by the hand to lead them out of egypt, because they did not remain faithful to my covenant, and i turned away from them, declares the lord.
when she and the members of her household were baptized, she invited us to her home. “if you consider me a believer in the lord,” she said, “come and stay at my house.” and she persuaded us.
sleep deeply
universe
what is more, he was chosen by the churches to accompany us as we carry the offering, which we administer in order to honor the lord himself and to show our eagerness to help.
if a dog sees something he will go after it and catch it.
while he was still on the way, his servants met him with the news that his boy was living.
there is no one who understands; there is no one who seeks god.
gleam (shiny object)
the next year the [amount of] corn was enough that it could be sold.
newly pregnant
for if the message spoken by angels was binding, and every violation and disobedience received its just punishment,
no one can serve two masters. either you will hate the one and love the other, or you will be devoted to the one and despise the other. you cannot serve both god and money.”
fourth finger or toe.
fall through a hole in the floor
after the lord jesus had spoken to them, he was taken up into heaven and he sat at the right hand of god.
may our lord jesus christ himself and god our father, who loved us and by his grace gave us eternal encouragement and good hope,  encourage your hearts and strengthen you in every good deed and word.
a furious squall came up, and the waves broke over the boat, so that it was nearly swamped.
when jesus had called the twelve together, he gave them power and authority to drive out all demons and to cure diseases,
when i had a tooth extracted, i wasn't able to eat at noon.
out of his mouth comes a sharp sword with which to strike down the nations. "he will rule them with an iron scepter." he treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of god almighty.
he entered the house of god, and taking the consecrated bread, he ate what is lawful only for priests to eat. and he also gave some to his companions.”
something with a lot of hair or feathers; hairy, furry, feathery
as jesus was saying these things, a woman in the crowd called out, "blessed is the mother who gave you birth and nursed you."
if we confront [someone], we go to his house and there we will confront  him. the [word] supmat is the same as that you are confronting him because you speak to him.
“then the lord said to him, ‘take off your sandals, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.
chair or place to sit
whatever we request, we tell our companion whatever it is that we need.
if your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off and throw it away. it is better for you to enter life maimed or crippled than to have two hands or two feet and be thrown into eternal fire.
malaria
rather, he must be hospitable, one who loves what is good, who is self-controlled, upright, holy and disciplined.
when a person becomes emaciated, the side of his hip bone protrudes.
dragged him out of the city and began to stone him. meanwhile, the witnesses laid their coats at the feet of a young man named saul.
broad jump, leap
but he answered one of them, ‘i am not being unfair to you, friend. didn’t you agree to work for a denarius?
a
i'm going to move to another location.
the son of melea, the son of menna, the son of mattatha, the son of nathan, the son of david,
god, who has called you into fellowship with his son jesus christ our lord, is faithful.
the creeks which have become shallow pools, we remove the water until it dries up and then we can catch the fish [and other edible water creatures].
an amount of prepared slices of something
put boards around granary posts to prevent rats from climbing
since that time he waits for his enemies to be made his footstool,
we are not trying to commend ourselves to you again, but are giving you an opportunity to take pride in us, so that you can answer those who take pride in what is seen rather than in what is in the heart.
i urge you, brothers, to watch out for those who cause divisions and put 1699 obstacles in your way that are contrary to the teaching you have learned. keep away from them.
they must be silenced, because they are ruining whole households by teaching things they ought not to teach-- and that for the sake of dishonest gain.
taganay is resentful.
but a pharisee named gamaliel, a teacher of the law, who was honored by all the people, stood up in the sanhedrin and ordered that the men be put outside for a little while.
beloved
slide deliberately, as down a pole
pasita fed tumbasoy because she wasn’t embarrassed.
to be suitable
toe
we were obstrcted by the soldiers.
at that time the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
although he was a son, he learned obedience from what he suffered
our understanding [of the meaning] is uncluttered, straight and clear.
to experience or encounter.
in the same way, count yourselves dead to sin but alive to god in christ jesus.
they sent their disciples to him along with the herodians. “teacher,” they said, “we know that you are a man of integrity and that you teach the way of god in accordance with the truth. you aren’t swayed by others, because you pay no attention to who they are.
stand leaves up along rock used to form a small dam in trapping fish
dig up
the lagtang vine, its fruit is used to poison the banak fish.
you are unhelpful.
for it is god's will that by doing good you should silence the ignorant talk of foolish men.
to chew betel nut; a larger variety of cultivated betel nut; betel nut container.
if we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done in the beginning is supplanted. and then we are distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish what we started out to do.
but there were also false prophets among the people, just as there will be false teachers among you. they will secretly introduce destructive heresies, even denying the sovereign lord who bought them--bringing swift destruction on themselves.
go down a creek to a river junction
in those days john the baptist came, preaching in the wilderness of judea
traumatized or immobilized,
to earn money
not given to drunkenness, not violent but gentle, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money.
the inside of this building is also called spacious.
jump down.
john answered them all, “i baptize you with water. but one who is more powerful than i will come, the straps of whose sandals i am not worthy to untie. he will baptize you with the holy spirit and fire.
you
the pig which i am giving to you is being used to open the door to inquiry to jog your memory if you have forgotten that which is mine that is, an unpaid debt for help with a bride price?
they will be paid back with harm for the harm they have done. their idea of pleasure is to carouse in broad daylight. they are blots and blemishes, reveling in their pleasures while they feast with you.
one wouldn't say the liboganon river was at high tide unless all of the flat area has been completely [covered] by flooding.
you were invited.
from the time that john was born, god was in his heart because he [god] was the one who determined that john should be born.
the child who always cries until daybreak is called a child who predicts bad luck.
"who has ever given to god, that god should repay him?"
and was designated by god to be high priest in the order of melchizedek.
a clock also has phosphorescence.
large seed
‘but you, bethlehem, in the land of judah, are by no means least among the rulers of judah; for out of you will come a ruler who will shepherd my people israel.’”
that which he attributed to another person was his means of hiding his fault.
the centurion replied, “lord, i do not deserve to have you come under my roof. but just say the word, and my servant will be healed.
everyone with me sends you greetings. greet those who love us in the faith. grace be with you all.
“and now, father, glorify me in your presence with the glory i had with you before the world began.”
when the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the pain.
unhusked rice
then another sign appeared in heaven: an enormous red dragon with seven heads and ten horns and seven crowns on its heads.
on hearing his words, some of the people said, "surely this man is the prophet."
in the synagogue there was a man possessed by a demon, an impure spirit. he cried out at the top of his voice,
they brought jesus to the place called golgotha (which means the place of the skull)
many women were there, watching from a distance. they had followed jesus from galilee to care for his needs.
then agrippa said to festus, "i would like to hear this man myself." he replied, "tomorrow you will hear him."
paul, an apostle of christ jesus by the will of god, and timothy our brother, to the church of god in corinth, together with all his holy people throughout achaia:
but god raised him from the dead,
jesus said, "this voice was for your benefit, not mine.
on the next sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear the word of the lord.
find out.
the chickens have perched already.
he saw the disciples straining at the oars, because the wind was against them. about the fourth watch of the night he went out to them, walking on the lake. he was about to pass by them,
‘these people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me.
there was a man sent from god whose name was john.
you also must be ready, because the son of man will come at an hour when you do not expect him."
so do not be ashamed to testify about our lord, or ashamed of me his prisoner. but join with me in suffering for the gospel, by the power of god,
small bamboo water pole used in the rainy season
frighten each other
there was a oerson who was attacked by his enemy and was unable to restrain himself from resisting/fighting back.
therefore, the promise comes by faith, so that it may be by grace and may be guaranteed to all abraham’s offspring—not only to those who are of the law but also to those who have the faith of abraham. he is the father of us all.
to take/bring something across (river) to someone else
sharp
brothers and sisters, i could not address you as people who live by the spirit but as people who are still worldly—mere infants in christ.
the children will measure each other's stone's throw [to see] who can reach the other side [of the river with his stone].
we know that anyone born of god does not continue to sin; the one who was born of god keeps him safe, and the evil one cannot harm him.
he was given power to give breath to the image of the first beast, so that it could speak and cause all who refused to worship the image to be killed.
because of this, the rumor spread among the brothers that this disciple would not die. but jesus did not say that he would not die; he only said, "if i want him to remain alive until i return, what is that to you?"
breakfast
deaf
so with you: now is your time of grief, but i will see you again and you will rejoice, and no one will take away your joy
when pilate saw that he was getting nowhere, but that instead an uproar was starting, he took water and washed his hands in front of the crowd. “i am innocent of this man’s blood,” he said. “it is your responsibility!”
yellow
greet one another with a holy kiss.
nearly
throw something at someone or something.
"abraham is our father," they answered. "if you were abraham's children," said jesus, "then you would
develop
so do not be ashamed to testify about our lord, or ashamed of me his prisoner. but join with me in suffering for the gospel, by the power of god,
finally the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, also went inside. he saw and believed.
some people standing there asked, "what are you doing, untying that colt?"
monthly-paid worker (housegirl, etc.)
as for the rice plant, it naturally spreads out at the base.
then they offered him wine mixed with myrrh, but he did not take it.
eat up
share
greed, malice, deceit, lewdness, envy, slander, arrogance and folly.
theirs are the patriarchs, and from them is traced the human ancestry of the messiah, who is god over all, forever praised! amen.
pack to go
undoubtedly there are all sorts of languages in the world, yet none of them is without meaning.
now may the lord of peace himself give you peace at all times and in every way. the lord be with all of you.
i am the bread of life.
a week later his disciples were in the house again, and thomas was with them. though the doors were locked, jesus came and stood among them and said, "peace be with you!"
large loosely woven rattan carrying basket
unhusked rice
meeting to decide on a course of action.
five days later the high priest ananias went down to caesarea with some of the elders and a lawyer named tertullus, and they brought their charges against paul before the governor.
if our cooking of viand is good, it is delicious because it is tasty because the meat/fish is tasty.
if they want to inquire about something, they should ask their own husbands at home; for it is disgraceful for a woman to speak in the church.
every high priest is selected from among the people and is appointed to represent the people in matters related to god, to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
to the rest i say this (i, not the lord): if any brother has a wife who is not a believer and she is willing to live with him, he must not divorce her.
because of the service by which you have proved yourselves, men will praise god for the obedience that accompanies your confession of the gospel of christ, and for your generosity in sharing with them and with everyone else.
you watch over the dead, your emotional pain accompanies you, you weep and sit in silence. that is when a person does not talk.
to go and inform another village of death.
even tax collectors came to be baptized. “teacher,” they asked, “what should we do?”
he answered, "anyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman commits adultery against her.
they must keep hold of the deep truths of the faith with a clear conscience.
spread out one’s wings or arms.
rumbling sound
weather
if he let it go, he intended to release the dog.
you have let go of the commands of god and are holding on to the traditions of men.
out of his fullness we have all received grace in place of grace already given.
the dead man came out, his hands and feet wrapped with strips of linen, and a cloth around his face. jesus said to them, "take off the grave clothes and let him go."
on one occasion an expert in the law stood up to test jesus. “teacher,” he asked, “what must i do to inherit eternal life?”
if someone has an infected sore, he will peel off some tobacco and apply it to the sore to keep off the flies.
mature
(as he said through his holy prophets of long ago),
rolling rushing water, current
the grace of the lord jesus christ be with your spirit.
have a cold
stomachache
so he called him in and asked him, ‘what is this i hear about you? give an account of your management, because you cannot be manager any longer.’
measure off
by examining him yourself, you will be able to learn the truth about all these charges we are bringing against him.”
to go around something
you know what has happened throughout the province of judea, beginning in galilee after the baptism that john preached—
but the word of the lord stands forever." and this is the word that was preached to you.
he said this while teaching in the synagogue in capernaum.
if the speech is not finished, we don't know what a person is telling us.
the person who gets provoked, even if what we say is small, he/she will be quick to become angry.
we scrape the sheath of the knife so that it will become smooth.
isn’t this the carpenter’s son? isn’t his mother’s name mary, and aren’t his brothers james, joseph, simon and judas?
abandon
"i tell you the truth," he said, "this poor widow has put in more than all the others.
bring along
and when he had taken it, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the lamb. each one had a harp and they were holding golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.
you move forward and i’ll move back a bit
on their second visit, joseph told his brothers who he was, and pharaoh learned about joseph’s family.
if there is a horse which i will reserve, i will give a pig as a downpayment (lit. that which i [give] ahead of time). that is my guarantee that i have reserved it.
the king will reply, ‘truly i tell you, whatever you did for one of the least of these brothers and sisters of mine, you did for me.’
when jesus came down from the mountainside, large crowds followed him.
i knew that you always hear me, but i said this for the benefit of the people standing here, that they may believe that you sent me."
that same day jesus went out of the house and sat by the lake.
gentle and of good character
a kind of black rice.
just then a man in their synagogue who was possessed by an evil spirit cried out,
then the voice that i had heard from heaven spoke to me once more: “go, take the scroll that lies open in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the land.”
in all this you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while you may have had to suffer grief in all kinds of trials.
prop
that is why many among you are weak and sick, and a number of you have fallen asleep.
to be confident
see that no one is sexually immoral, or is godless like esau, who for a single meal sold his inheritance rights as the oldest son.
encircle
force
to those not having the law i became like one not having the law (though i am not free from god’s law but am under christ’s law), so as to win those not having the law.
include
wait expectantly
i do all this for the sake of the gospel, that i may share in its blessings.
that which we use to treat [crops] are plants, banga palm, fan palm, plants of the field, vines which are the treatments of plants.
lazy
“where is this man?” they asked him. “i don’t know,” he said.
bohemian waxwing bird (with feathered headdress)
after leaving them, he went up on a mountainside to pray.
to stab
when he heard this, jesus said, “this sickness will not end in death. no, it is for god’s glory so that god’s son may be glorified through it.”
if there is a jeep which is broken down which needs to be taken to a shop for repair, they also have it towed by another jeep.
orphaned
with negative: [not] quite
between
they answered as jesus had told them to, and the people let them go.
on the third day, they threw the ship's tackle overboard with their own hands.
after he said this, he showed them his hands and side. the disciples were overjoyed when they saw the lord.
to distribute evenly, as to sow a field so the seed is spread throughout
moon
but he who disowns me before men will be disowned before the angels of god.
when we slide [the box] portion into the match container, its body matches.
the spirit and the bride say, "come!" and let him who hears say, "come!" whoever is thirsty, let him come; and whoever wishes, let him take the free gift of the water of life.
climb down.
egg
answer
he's forgotten to give it to us.
a group of people working together
to stir around a liquid
for what is our hope, our joy, or the crown in which we will glory in the presence of our lord jesus when he comes? is it not you?
then the angel said to him, “put on your clothes and sandals.” and peter did so. “wrap your cloak around you and follow me,” the angel told him.
spouse
he who has the son has life; he who does not have the son of god does not have life.
coerce
this is why it is said: “wake up, sleeper, rise from the dead, and christ will shine on you.”
the jailer brought them into his house and set a meal before them; he was filled with joy because he had come to believe in god--he and his whole family.
put something inside a cage or pen
a perch for a bird or chicken
yet i am writing you a new command; its truth is seen in him and you, because the darkness is passing and the true light is already shining.
adequate
preserve meat by cooking without water and storing in bamboo
green
surprisingly
a kind of white sugarcane that has soft, easy to chew pith.
it is written: ‘and he was numbered with the transgressors and i tell you that this must be fulfilled in me. yes, what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment. those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads and saying, "so! you who are going to destroy the temple and build it in three days,
the cat is spoiled because it is used to eating sardines.
does not the very nature of things teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a disgrace to him,
give orders
philip answered him, "it would take more than half a year's wages to buy enough bread for each one to have a bite!"
damming of creek to trap fish
to be crazy, demented
damming of creek to trap fish
[some manuscripts include: “for the son of man came to save what was lost.”]
but the centurion, instead of listening to what paul said, followed the advice of the pilot and of the owner of the ship.
squeeze juices out, as from shredded coconut
here is a trustworthy saying: if we died with him, we will also live with him;
fall
for the great day of their wrath has come, and who can withstand it?”
to flick something off
when the disciples saw this, they were amazed. “how did the fig tree wither so quickly?” they asked.
as for people who have land, if there is a creek, they will make it to be their boundry.
the flat places are full of red mites
if someone is stabbed by a raider, the spear will pierce and go through [the body].
he sighed deeply and said, "why does this generation ask for a miraculous sign? i tell you the truth, no sign will be given to it."
for my yoke is easy and my burden is light.”
he will bring back many of the people of israel to the lord their god.
so that even though
"who is he, sir?" the man asked. "tell me so that i may believe in him."
to obey
much
“who touched me?” jesus asked. when they all denied it, peter said, “master, the people are crowding and pressing against you.”
take your pay and go. i want to give the one who was hired last the same as i gave you.
by faith enoch was taken from this life, so that he did not experience death: “he could not be found, because god had taken him away.” for before he was taken, he was commended as one who pleased god.
bring together
hair (poetic term)
initiative
poisonous vine which is used both for poisoning fish and for committing suicide.
read.
spill out
before certain men came from james, he used to eat with the gentiles. but when they arrived, he began to draw back and separate himself from the gentiles because he was afraid of those who belonged to the circumcision group.
and last of all he appeared to me also, as to one abnormally born.
he or she just temporarily stays
satiated on meat.
just as you who were at one time disobedient to god have now received mercy as a result of their disobedience,
after going through pisidia, they came into pamphylia,
chicken disease that causes death
how many
but some of them became obstinate; they refused to believe and publicly maligned the way. so paul left them. he took the disciples with him and had discussions daily in the lecture hall of tyrannus.
again he denied it. after a little while, those standing near said to peter, "surely you are one of them, for you are a galilean."
someone like emuel, because they have become ariola, he is [my] second cousin
and by that will, we have been made holy through the sacrifice of the body of jesus christ once for all.
"the god who made the world and everything in it is the lord of heaven and earth and does not live in temples built by hands.
show something
the inside of this building is also called spacious.
to what can i compare this generation? they are like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling out to others:
small, double-woven two-piece case or wallet
after they had heard the king, they went on their way, and the star they had seen when it rose went ahead of them until it stopped over the place where the child was.  when they saw the star, they were overjoyed.
dilidaly
do not deceive yourselves. if any one of you thinks he is wise by the standards of this age, he should become a "fool" so that he may become wise.
because it was the jewish day of preparation and since the tomb was nearby, they laid jesus there.
“i replied, ‘surely not, lord! nothing impure or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’
a kind of white sugarcane that has soft, easy to chew pith.
big
the week which will follow has already begun.
when jesus heard this, he was amazed at him, and turning to the crowd following him, he said, “i tell you, i have not found such great faith even in israel.”
to allow
it’s bad to marry when still a child.
then satan entered judas, called iscariot, one of the twelve.
gather together
a flower which is closed has not yet opened.
anyone who listens to the word but does not do what it says is like a man who looks at his face in a mirror
the written notice of the charge against him read: the king of the jews.
swamp
once you were alienated from god and were enemies in your minds because of your evil behavior.
person whose familiar spirit comes with the moon
for we are god's fellow workers; you are god's field, god's building.
and then when [the woman] gives birth, that is what is used to help as the hands of the midwife are caused to accompany
hide
jesus replied, “go back and report to john what you hear and see:  the blind receive sight, the lame walk, those who have leprosy are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the good news is proclaimed to the poor.  blessed is anyone who does not stumble on account of me.”
i became a servant of this gospel by the gift of god’s grace given me through the working of his power.
set
glance
to do something by hand
small fishhook
so that
he saw through their duplicity and said to them,
therefore i want you to know that no one who is speaking by the spirit of god says, “jesus be cursed,” and no one can say, “jesus is lord,” except by the holy spirit.
an inlet [of water] at the ocean, if it has no outlet, it is an inlet which [forms] a lake.
it was just soaked briefly.
we have confidence in the lord that you are doing and will continue to do the things we command.
barely
sniff or smell
morally bad
coconut shredder
do i say this merely on human authority? doesn’t the law say the same thing?
if ten women are weeding their rice, they work together as a group as they weed.
to urge to do or to accept something
formerly, when you did not know god, you were slaves to those who by nature are not gods.
as for us, we cannot help speaking about what we have seen and heard.”
to show mercy to our ancestors and to remember his holy covenant,
so that even handkerchiefs and aprons that had touched him were taken to the sick, and their illnesses were cured and the evil spirits left them.
peel off layers from something, as onions or banana stalk
narrow
a fistful is taking a large handful of food.
to be lacking
slaves, obey your earthly masters in everything; and do it, not only when their eye is on you and to win their favor, but with sincerity of heart and reverence for the lord.
to go over there (within sight)
to soak in water.
"this is how it will be with anyone who stores up things for himself but is not rich toward god."
termite
spread out; open to display, open, as a flower
marmot
the reason for something
a spirit who accompanies imbabasuk
more than forty men were involved in this plot.
it is just as isaiah said previously: “unless the lord almighty had left us descendants, we would have become like sodom, we would have been like gomorrah.”
he dealt treacherously with our people and oppressed our ancestors by forcing them to throw out their newborn babies so that they would die.
i
form of red, malleable clay soil which is suitable for making clay pots.
a few men became followers of paul and believed. among them was dionysius, a member of the areopagus, also a woman named damaris, and a number of others.
[it will] possibly be one week. [it will] possibly be two weeks.
desert or leave without informing someone
jesus answered, “it is written: ‘man shall not live on bread alone.’”
a chicken clucks when it flies down from having laid an egg.
dam up
two men, moses and elijah, appeared in glorious splendor, talking with jesus.
when we fell a tree, then we saw up enough for a house.
small wooden pole
afraid
"is that your own idea," jesus asked, "or did others talk to you about me?"
carry each other's burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of christ.
so they pulled their boats up on shore, left everything and followed him.
he will also keep you firm to the end, so that you will be blameless on the day of our lord jesus christ.
request for repayment of a brideprice
therefore, strengthen your feeble arms and weak knees.
poison.
but after i have risen, i will go ahead of you into galilee.”
three days after arriving in the province, festus went up from caesarea to jerusalem,
arrive at a destination
i inadvertently stepped on a centepede which immediately latched onto my foot.
cut out the knot.
and the scripture was fulfilled that says, "abraham believed god, and it was credited to him as righteousness," and he was called god's friend.
originate
the angel answered, “the holy spirit will come on you, and the power of the most high will overshadow you. so the holy one to be born will be called the son of god.
who are [those] people who have just passed by?” they replied, “we have come from kapugi no du-on tu-ud noy diò to patil.”
attraction
ride
blessed is the one who reads aloud the words of this prophecy, and blessed are those who hear it and take to heart what is written in it, because the time is near.
kind of white rice
but if they cannot control themselves, they should marry, for it is better to marry than to burn with passion.
"if he were not a criminal," they replied, "we would not have handed him over to you."
don't give in to them, because more than forty of them are waiting in ambush for him. they have taken an oath not to eat or drink until they have killed him. they are ready now, waiting for your consent to their request."
we work hard with our own hands. when we are cursed, we bless; when we are persecuted, we endure it;
if there is someone who collects payment for a horse but it has been sold on credit, the one who has received the horse can use anything for payment.
there is poisonous sap in the seeds of the pangi and in the kolut tuber.
some people are slow to get out of breath when he/she swims underwater and touches the bottom of a deep pool.
we search for the offspring.
when evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, ‘call the workers and pay them their wages, beginning with the last ones hired and going on to the first.’
after that, he appeared to more than five hundred of the brothers and sisters at the same time, most of whom are still living, though some have fallen asleep.
give the people these instructions, so that no one may be open to blame.
as a prisoner for the lord, then, i urge you to live a life worthy of the calling you have received.
now i say to the rest of you in thyatira, to you who do not hold to her teaching and have not learned satan’s so-called deep secrets, ‘i will not impose any other burden on you,
the hearth frame was burned.
a small loosely woven basket of rattan, used for fishing
push or sweep aside
an [example of a] curse: “you will not have reached one month and you [will] have died.”
the [water] of the liboganon river doesn’t rise unless it floods. the [water] of the ocean rises but it still remains clear.
as for that lady teacher, she had just newly died.
close one’s eyes
heed a warning
and a great crowd of people followed him because they saw the miraculous signs he had performed on the sick.
when you lay down, lay your head here.
for it is not those who hear the law who are righteous in god’s sight, but it is those who obey the law who will be declared righteous.
many deceivers, who do not acknowledge jesus christ as coming in the flesh, have gone out into the world. any such person is the deceiver and the antichrist.
when someone gravels a road, that is what is meant by scattering rocks.
what we are looking at has become blurry; we cannot see the writing clearly.
but when god, who set me apart from my mother’s womb and called me by his grace, was pleased  to reveal his son in me so that i might preach him among the gentiles, my immediate response was not to consult any human being.
i am going to send you what my father has promised; but stay in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high."
brothers and sisters, each person, as responsible to god, should remain in the situation they were in when god called them.
his own full younger sibling.
so no one can say that you were baptized into my name.
a person who is uncouth acts inappropriately is what a person is called who doesn’t have [good] manners.  he just chatters [things] which arent good.
they devour widows' houses and for a show make lengthy prayers. such men will be punished most severely."
night and day, whether he sleeps or gets up, the seed sprouts and grows, though he does not know how.
so then, let us not be like others, who are asleep, but let us be awake and sober.
and as for you, brothers and sisters, never tire of doing what is good.
husked rice; raw, half-cooked rice
he cannot claim it until he has taken it.
on hearing this, jesus said to them, "it is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick. i have not come to call the righteous, but sinners."
wiggle
just as they were handed down to us by those who from the first were eyewitnesses and servants of the word.
change one’s clothes.
slice the cassava thinly because we will dry it after a while.
my grade one teacher was also the one who taught judith.
that same day jesus went out of the house and sat by the lake.
still another angel, who had charge of the fire, came from the altar and called in a loud voice to him who had the sharp sickle, "take your sharp sickle and gather the clusters of grapes from the earth's vine, because its grapes are ripe."
if you build a fire and blow on it, you will get smoke in your eyes and they will start smarting.
easily
whether it is high or short, thick or thin, if it is in the yard and surrounds a house, it is called a fense.
whiter
hectare.
a step-father (or adoptive father] is not the true [i.e. biological] father.
strike sparks from flint
dance
and said, “brothers and sisters, the scripture had to be fulfilled in which the holy spirit spoke long ago through david concerning judas, who served as guide for those who arrested jesus.
shouting, "men of israel, help us! this is the man who teaches all men everywhere against our people and our law and this place. and besides, he has brought greeks into the temple area and defiled this holy place."
when they see the purity and reverence of your lives.
the man left his wife and four children. and now, he has abandoned his wife and children
greet priscilla and aquila and the household of onesiphorus.
and he went outside and wept bitterly.
as he taught, jesus said, "watch out for the teachers of the law. they like to walk around in flowing robes and be greeted in the marketplaces,
"another said, 'i have just bought five yoke of oxen, and i'm on my way to try them out. please excuse me.'
the armed men are very many who attack their enemies.
but christ has indeed been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep.
to hold something in one's mouth
but he said to me, "do not do it! i am a fellow servant with you and with your brothers the prophets and of all who keep the words of this book. worship god!"
knead, as bread
he entered the house of god, and he and his companions ate the consecrated bread—which was not lawful for them to do, but only for the priests.
if you purpose to make a purchase transaction, you will inquire and if [the other person] will give it, you will buy it.
and said, “brothers and sisters, the scripture had to be fulfilled in which the holy spirit spoke long ago through david concerning judas, who served as guide for those who arrested jesus.
we act irresponsible because we’ve been charmed.
bugs can’t get into it
when they brought the colt to jesus and threw their cloaks over it, he sat on it
fish net
to you
but now you must also rid yourselves of all such things as these: anger, rage, malice, slander, and filthy language from your lips.
recover
"as for what you see here, the time will come when not one stone will be left on another; every one of them will be thrown down."
he exercised all the authority of the first beast on his behalf, and made the earth and its inhabitants worship the first beast, whose fatal wound had been healed.
fish palm [tree]
for through him we both have access to the father by one spirit.
seed
two people to move very close to each other
to enter a house
simon's mother-in-law was in bed with a fever, and they told jesus about her.
mimic
anyone who lives on milk, being still an infant, is not acquainted with the teaching about righteousness.
"though i have been speaking figuratively, a time is coming when i will no longer use this kind of language but will tell you plainly about my father.
each man should give what he has decided in his heart to give, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for god loves a cheerful giver.
truly i tell you, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened.
i tell you, no! but unless you repent, you too will all perish."
abaca bark.
the corn will be skinny. the ears will be small.
the dog who is a nursing mother, when she playfully bites her offspring, she plays with her offspring. she gently bites her offspring.
the eagle/hawk which is called a bird of prey is quick to swoop down and snatch the chicken’s chicks when it preys on them.
the width of the body to the beetle is nearly one inch.
when the lamb opened the second seal, i heard the second living creature say, “come!”
jesus spoke to them again in parables, saying:
we have come to share in christ, if indeed we hold firmly to the end the confidence we had at first.
large eyes
but when the apostles barnabas and paul heard of this, they tore their clothes and rushed out into the crowd, shouting:
if you keep on biting and devouring each other, watch out or you will be destroyed by each other.
no bag for the journey or extra shirt or sandals or a staff, for the worker is worth his keep.
stretch or hold out one’s hand
they examined me and wanted to release me, because i was not guilty of any crime deserving death.
you will be his witness to all men of what you have seen and heard.
if the ministry that brought condemnation was glorious, how much more glorious is the ministry that brings righteousness!
anyone who receives instruction in the word must share all good things with his instructor.
kind of tree, wood used in rice charm
weave with overlapping strands, as in fish traps
with burnt offerings and sin offerings you were not pleased.
large land snail
kind of wide, beaded bracelet
yet do not regard them as enemies, but warn them as you would a fellow believer.
from perga they went on to pisidian antioch. on the sabbath they entered the synagogue and sat down.
from the tribe of judah 12,000 were sealed, from the tribe of reuben 12,000, from the tribe of gad 12,000,  from the tribe of asher 12,000, from the tribe of naphtali 12,000, from the tribe of manasseh 12,000,  from the tribe of simeon 12,000, from the tribe of levi 12,000, from the tribe of issachar 12,000,  from the tribe of zebulun 12,000, from the tribe of joseph 12,000, from the tribe of benjamin 12,000.
jew’s harp
and we will be ready to punish every act of disobedience, once your obedience is complete.
"where did this man get these things?" they asked. "what's this wisdom that has been given him, that he even does miracles! isn't this the carpenter? isn't this mary's son and the brother of james, joseph, judas and simon? aren't his sisters here with us?" and they took offense at him.
“blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
if it is soft and flexible, it will not crack.
for i resolved to know nothing while i was with you except jesus christ and him crucified.
sow seed by casting
“if you keep my commands, you will remain in my love, just as i have kept my father’s commands and remain in his love.”
this, then, is how you should pray: “our father in heaven, hallowed be your name,
because of this, god gave them over to shameful lusts. even their women exchanged natural sexual relations for unnatural ones.
in the same way your father in heaven is not willing that any of these little ones should perish.
the house is getting old.
when jesus saw this, he was indignant. he said to them, "let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of god belongs to such as these.
lumpy
participant.
so paul asked, “then what baptism did you receive?” “john’s baptism,” they replied.
dissuade from doing something
who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the master has put in charge of the servants in his household to give them their food at the proper time?
no matter how much money you are short , you are the one who will decide how much money to give [to me].
but someone will say, "you have faith; i have deeds."
paul, an apostle of christ jesus by the will of god, in keeping with the promise of life that is in christ jesus,
two events, or more, occurring simultaneously
when he saw jesus passing by, he said, “look, the lamb of god!”
flee from sexual immorality. all other sins a person commits are outside the body, but whoever sins sexually, sins against their own body.
jesus did many other miraculous signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not recorded in this book.
two men wrestle with each other to discover who is the strongest.
a couple with no children, living by themselves on a hilltop
clamshell, clam.
and he sent messengers on ahead, who went into a samaritan village to get things ready for him;
but first he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
poison used to harm or kill an enemy
jacob’s well was there, and jesus, tired as he was from the journey, sat down by the well. it was about noon.
each day jesus was teaching at the temple, and each evening he went out to spend the night on the hill called the mount of olives,
airborne dust
to wind
the next day as they were leaving bethany, jesus was hungry.
when we teach a child to write his/her name, we say, do it like this to write. included in the meaning is our demonstration as we teach.
[as for] agot-ot soil, corn will not flourish [in it] the corn will be skinny.
god did this so that, by two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for god to lie, we who have fled to take hold of the hope offered to us may be greatly encouraged.
if he cries to go along, he wants to go with his mother.
so the soldiers took the money and did as they were instructed. and this story has been widely circulated among the jews to this very day.
here he is, speaking publicly, and they are not saying a word to him. have the authorities really concluded that he is the christ ?
necklace
this is why it says: “when he ascended on high, he took many captives and gave gifts to his people.”
now we can see that you know all things and that you do not even need to have anyone ask you questions. this makes us believe that you came from god."
a kind of dried fish
eyes have white spots/cataracts
he was not seen by all the people, but by witnesses whom god had already chosen—by us who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead.
but every spirit that does not acknowledge jesus is not from god. this is the spirit of the antichrist, which you have heard is coming and even now is already in the world.
pit
polì wood is slow-burning.
affect
jesus left the synagogue and went to the home of simon. now simon’s mother-in-law was suffering from a high fever, and they asked jesus to help her.
so, if you think you are standing firm, be careful that you don't fall!
as for our bodies, the pain of tingling is like the pain of being repeatedly poked by needles.
welcome him in the lord with great joy, and honor men like him,
if the place where our companion lives is far away, and if i would have liked to visit, it will be too far for me to go. i won’t be able to manage to go to that place because it is too far.
to swear or vow
it is right for me to feel this way about all of you, since i have you in my heart and, whether i am in chains or defending and confirming the gospel, all of you share in god’s grace with me.
liquor
" 'i am jesus, whom you are persecuting,' the lord replied. 'now get up and stand on your feet. i have appeared to you to appoint you as a servant and as a witness of what you have seen of me and what i will show you.
banana
but i do not think i am in the least inferior to those "super-apostles."
large conical land snail
but whoever hates his brother is in the darkness and walks around in the darkness; he does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded him.
pig.
if someone shivers, they begin to have chills.
cut by directing blows at a slant to the surface
the churches in the province of asia send you greetings. aquila and priscilla greet you warmly in the lord, and so does the church that meets at their house.
and i saw a beast coming out of the sea. he had ten horns and seven heads, with ten crowns on his horns, and on each head a blasphemous name. the beast i saw resembled a leopard, but had feet like those of a bear and a mouth like that of a lion. the dragon gave the beast his power and his throne and great authority.
whose
they began to question among themselves which of them it might be who would do this.
do your best to come to me quickly,
kindling wood
turmeric plant used to cook with meat
floor joists
fawn all over someone
glottalized singing or crying
expression of regret.
promise
because of this, god gave them over to shameful lusts. even their women exchanged natural sexual relations for unnatural ones.
skin inflammation (red and blistery)
a single turn is just one curve.
the lord turned and looked straight at peter. then peter remembered the word the lord had spoken to him: "before the rooster crows today, you will disown me three times."
to wash face
type of exchange (barter or purchase)
if it seems advisable for me to go also, they will accompany me.
the [word] amonggoy, that is also used to call/address a father. it is a name used to praise [one’s father].
it hurts if the hair gets pulled.
one of them, the disciple whom jesus loved, was reclining next to him.
leech
when the crowds heard philip and saw the signs he performed, they all paid close attention to what he said.
for whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for me and for the gospel will save it.
“all these i have kept since i was a boy,” he said.
was it a sin for me to lower myself in order to elevate you by preaching the gospel of god to you free of charge?
if there would be someone who would ask who your companion is, they would say, “we are just a married couple. we don't have any children yet.”
anyone you forgive, i also forgive. and what i have forgiven—if there was anything to forgive—i have forgiven in the sight of christ for your sake,
therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, and in this way death came to all people, because all sinned—
the king is familiar with these things, and i can speak freely to him. i am convinced that none of this has escaped his notice, because it was not done in a corner.
as for a skeleton, it is all the bones [of the body] which are not disconnected (lit. separated) from the head, neck, upper arm(s), body which has ribs, thighs and feet [lit. foot] and toes/fingers.
some, however, made fun of them and said, “they have had too much wine.”
attentive
to not be still a minute
since there is only one god, who will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through that same faith.
in the case of a will, it is necessary to prove the death of the one who made it,
for john came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘he has a demon.’
filled out or expanded
cut-down cogon grass.
if you really keep the royal law found in scripture, "love your neighbor as yourself," you are doing right.
this child who talks back to that which his mother tells him to do is too much.
when the old leaves have come off, they are replaced by new leaves and the tree buds with flowers.
to the church of god in corinth, to those sanctified in christ jesus and called to be his holy people, together with all those everywhere who call on the name of our lord jesus christ—their lord and ours:
small hard red tree fruit used for decoration or spiritual purposes
tight fit
i plead with you, brothers and sisters, become like me, for i became like you. you did me no wrong.
remedy.
canoe.
the famine arrived.
for many are invited, but few are chosen.”
why question me? ask those who heard me. surely they know what i said."
tip
strengthening the disciples and encouraging them to remain true to the faith. “we must go through many hardships to enter the kingdom of god,” they said.
there was a person who got a bonanza of a large amount of fish which he caught with a net.
uncooked, insufficiently cooked
a kind of kuglung
jesus said to them, “surely you will quote this proverb to me: ‘physician, heal yourself!’ and you will tell me, ‘do here in your hometown what we have heard that you did in capernaum.’”
‘but you, bethlehem, in the land of judah, are by no means least among the rulers of judah; for out of you will come a ruler who will shepherd my people israel.’”
to boost one's strength.
and while they still did not believe it because of joy and amazement, he asked them, "do you have anything here to eat?"
[as for] the old person, he is unable to get around as he walks because his knees are hurt ing.
the men who were guarding jesus began mocking and beating him.
to clear field of brush and unwanted plants, etc.
a few
for you know that we dealt with each of you as a father deals with his own children, encouraging, comforting and urging you to live lives worthy of god, who calls you into his kingdom and glory.
household knife
unsymmetrical, crooked, or uneven mouth
set, as a date
now finish the work, so that your eager willingness to do it may be matched by your completion of it, according to your means.
sigh from weariness
fish eggs
quenched the fury of the flames, and escaped the edge of the sword; whose weakness was turned to strength; and who became powerful in battle and routed foreign armies.
not.
be scattered
about the radio, if we set it on the floor, if there are children who play, it is likely that it will be stepped or become destroyed.
something long and cylindrical to cast
but when you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
you
there remains, then, a sabbath-rest for the people of god;
choose for oneself
taking him by the right hand, he helped him up, and instantly the man’s feet and ankles became strong.
herald
to twist
to shake, as a house during an earthquake
the only thing they will be discussing is how much they will pay immediately upon request as a brideprice for that girl.
anyone who listens to the word but does not do what it says is like a man who looks at his face in a mirror
the disciples left, went into the city and found things just as jesus had told them. so they prepared the passover.
for it is we who are the circumcision, we who serve god by his spirit, who boast in christ jesus, and who put no confidence in the flesh—
wooden hoe-like instrument
however, do not rejoice that the spirits submit to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven.”
they had tails with stingers, like scorpions, and in their tails they had power to torment people for five months.
so then, he who marries the virgin does right, but he who does not marry her does better.
saul got up from the ground, but when he opened his eyes he could see nothing. so they led him by the hand into damascus.
the rain delayed us.
immediately after the distress of those days ‘the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from the sky, and the heavenly bodies will be shaken.’
we harvest young corn because we will boil it since it is good to eat.
palm heart
impet’s tail isn’t still a minute
so he immediately sent an executioner with orders to bring john's head. the man went, beheaded john in the prison,
so then, about eating food sacrificed to idols: we know that “an idol is nothing at all in the world” and that “there is no god but one.”
if we sneeze, it's possible that we are getting a cold.
if the tail of a puppy is tipped with white, people will not make a pet of it because they think it is bad luck.
having tiny holes or leaks
nose
marry one’s sibling (incest)
balance
where he stayed three months. because some jews had plotted against him just as he was about to sail for syria, he decided to go back through macedonia.
we worship god.
broad jump, leap
we beat with one drumstick on a [hanging] gong, and we beat a rhythm on a drum.
dry something in the sun
on my property, there is a curving stream which always makes the soil collapse. my intention is to make a pathway for the water to channel it so that the water will go directly across.
mary magdalene went to the disciples with the news: “i have seen the lord!” and she told them that he had said these things to her.
if a person who is jealous cannot steal, he will hate us and his view of us will be bad.
after six days jesus took peter, james and john with him and led them up a high mountain, where they were all alone. there he was transfigured before them.
that leaf is pounded and then the water is squeezed out.
expect
to exchange for a like kind; to replace
because the law brings wrath. and where there is no law there is no transgression.
yet i tell you that not even solomon in all his splendor was dressed like one of these.
and of this gospel i was appointed a herald and an apostle and a teacher.
now before the rich man could grab a stick.
shingle
a short, fat snake.
then jesus said to them, "give to caesar what is caesar's and to god what is god's." and they were amazed at him.
this is why i speak to them in parables: “though seeing, they do not see; though hearing, they do not hear or understand.
that woman was selfish and did not give her neighbor any rice.
he replied, “i saw satan fall like lightning from heaven.
wives, in the same way be submissive to your husbands so that, if any of them do not believe the word, they may be won over without words by the behavior of their wives,
aware of this, jesus said to them, “why are you bothering this woman? she has done a beautiful thing to me.
because i hear about your faith in the lord jesus and your love for all the saints.
i tell you the truth, you will weep and mourn while the world rejoices. you will grieve, but your grief will turn to joy
so they sat down in groups of hundreds and fifties.
he commanded us to preach to the people and to testify that he is the one whom god appointed as judge of the living and the dead.
everyone who sins breaks the law; in fact, sin is lawlessness.
i have not stopped giving thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers.
for the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil. some people, eager for money, have wandered from the faith and pierced themselves with many griefs.
follow the very same path as another
a pass, or valley between the slopes of mountains.
i saw the notebook which was here on top of the table.
fat of an animal or human.
cloudy and drizzly weather that promotes mushroom growth
recognize because of being able to see someone clearly
to yell.
every day they continued to meet together in the temple courts. they broke bread in their homes and ate together with glad and sincere hearts,
one (used in counting)
a human being
finally, be strong in the lord and in his mighty power.
we put no stumbling block in anyone’s path, so that our ministry will not be discredited.
to show.
roast corn kernels
i tell you that anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another woman commits adultery.”
“you are my friends if you do what i command.”
mildewed corn
for this reason he had to be made like his brothers in every way, in order that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in service to god, and that he might make atonement for the sins of the people.
i counsel you to buy from me gold refined in the fire, so you can become rich; and white clothes to wear, so you can cover your shameful nakedness; and salve to put on your eyes, so you can see.
but god, who comforts the downcast, comforted us by the coming of titus,
sprained
facial hair
the disciples were amazed at his words. but jesus said again, "children, how hard it is to enter the kingdom of god!
when they arrived, he said to them: “you know how i lived the whole time i was with you, from the first day i came into the province of asia.
kneel, as before a shaman for healing
to strengthen (as one's faith)
the scripture foresaw that god would justify the gentiles by faith, and announced the gospel in advance to abraham: "all nations will be blessed through you."
how much more, then, will the blood of christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself unblemished to god, cleanse our consciences from acts that lead to death, so that we may serve the living god!
take hold of and push
he didn't catch the ball which was thrown because it passed him but another person was able to catch it.
fishing creel
but god has revealed it to us by his spirit.
but whatever was to my profit i now consider loss for the sake of christ.
each of you should use whatever gift you have received to serve others, as faithful stewards of god’s grace in its various forms.
some distance from them a large herd of pigs was feeding.
at this the high priest ananias ordered those standing near paul to strike him on the mouth.
from this time many of his disciples turned back and no longer followed him.
“woman,” jesus replied, “believe me, a time is coming when you will worship the father neither on this mountain nor in jerusalem.
kind of weed with thorns
remedy, cure, medicine
for i can testify about them that they are zealous for god, but their zeal is not based on knowledge.
everything they do is done for people to see: they make their phylacteries wide and the tassels on their garments long;
domestic duck.
banana
he said, "this is the blood of the covenant, which god has commanded you to keep."
fame.
won’t listen
to address
slide or cut kernels from a corncob
out of the most severe trial, their overflowing joy and their extreme poverty welled up in rich generosity.
you blind men! which is greater: the gift, or the altar that makes the gift sacred?
in your own law it is written that the testimony of two men is valid.
collector
when he gave the letter [to me], he instructed (lit. caused) [me] to add to it by word of mouth to insure that [the person] would set aside some corn [for him].
now there were seven brothers. the first one married and died without leaving any children.
although i am less than the least of all the lord’s people, this grace was given to me: to preach to the gentiles the boundless riches of christ,
to hold onto
and the people went out to see what had happened. when they came to jesus, they found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting at jesus’ feet, dressed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
if they don't have land they are residing on someone else's land.
big stomach
“the gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice. he calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.”
shallow glass bowls
a priest happened to be going down the same road, and when he saw the man, he passed by on the other side.
don't take anything; we'll be seen.
i went in response to a revelation and, meeting privately with those esteemed as leaders, i presented to them the gospel that i preach among the gentiles. i wanted to be sure i was not running and had not been running my race in vain.
hole
desire, want
big
at that time many will turn away from the faith and will betray and hate each other,
i will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven; whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.”
i tell you, he will see that they get justice, and quickly. however, when the son of man comes, will he find faith on the earth?”
even though the people knew that i was the owner of those plants, they totally cut down [all] the bamboo which i had planted.
"my children, i will be with you only a little longer. you will look for me, and just as i told the jews, so i tell you now: where i am going, you cannot come.
and he then begins to beat his fellow servants and to eat and drink with drunkards.
to cut or break off leaves from a plant such as the leaves of a banana or similar plant.
there was a person who went bathing and dove headfirst and broke his neck because he hit his head [against something].
indeed, the very hairs of your head are all numbered. don't be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows.
one day jesus was praying in a certain place. when he finished, one of his disciples said to him, "lord, teach us to pray, just as john taught his disciples."
to divide in half.
to be made new in the attitude of your minds;
and anyone who does not carry his cross and follow me cannot be my disciple.
hop with both feet (as a bird, rabbit, or chicken)
the acts of the sinful nature are obvious: sexual immorality, impurity and debauchery;
jesus reached out his hand and touched the man. “i am willing,” he said. “be clean!” immediately he was cleansed of his leprosy.
again, the devil took him to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their splendor.
glint of reflected light, as from gold or gems
cap for a roof
the pig is the object of concern when someone has died.
and many people came to him. they said, "though john never performed a miraculous sign, all that john said about this man was true."
to dangle
filth, grime
the pharisee stood by himself and prayed: ‘god, i thank you that i am not like other people—robbers, evildoers, adulterers—or even like this tax collector.
timothy, guard what has been entrusted to your care. turn away from godless chatter and the opposing ideas of what is falsely called knowledge,
examine
kunsay, cut the mat material into strips for me first i’ll weave.
you-sing. smear some wet lime on the betelnut.
it’s our fate to have dreams predict misfortune for us.
a rattan woven basket
temporary or interim leader
"teacher," they said, "moses wrote for us that if a man's brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man must marry the widow and have children for his brother.
an argument started among the disciples as to which of them would be the greatest.
poke the rice
for the eyes of the lord are on the righteous and his ears are attentive to their prayer, but the face of the lord is against those who do evil."
but we had to celebrate and be glad, because this brother of yours was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.' "
put the ladder out from the house so dogs or children won’t enter.
sound of plucked instruments
if there is a person who wants to borrow money, he will discuss it with the one from whom he will borrow
if our teeth are touching each other, it is difficult to remove the particles of food between the teeth.
to experience something
even the leaves, they also drop off when they shed.
the pogul wood will break the frying pan.
language shorthand
cutting board
whoever finds their life will lose it, and whoever loses their life for my sake will find it.
to possess, or own, something
he is conceited and understands nothing. he has an unhealthy interest in controversies and quarrels about words that result in envy, strife, malicious talk, evil suspicions
physically undeveloped
while they were there, the time came for the baby to be born,
humble yourselves, therefore, under god's mighty hand, that he may lift you up in due time.
if a person asks when [a couple] was married, someone will respond, they were just married yesterday.
mary stayed with elizabeth for about three months and then returned home.
dew, moisture
brothers and sisters, each person, as responsible to god, should remain in the situation they were in when god called them.
for this is the way the holy women of the past who put their hope in god used to make themselves beautiful. they were submissive to their own husbands,
but how then would the scriptures be fulfilled that say it must happen in this way?”
and no one dared to ask him any more questions.
clearly no one who relies on the law is justified before god, because “the righteous will live by faith.”
when paul made his appeal to be held over for the emperor's decision, i ordered him held until i could send him to caesar."
we have an altar from which those who minister at the tabernacle have no right to eat.
short
in the market the catfish placed in the metal basin were writhing.
bump one’s forehead or knee.
form a pompadour or bun
simon replied, “i suppose the one who had the bigger debt forgiven.” “you have judged correctly,” jesus said.
the people who are cutting the airstrip are lined up side by side facing upriver.
in order that satan might not outwit us. for we are not unaware of his schemes.
you were bought at a price. therefore honor god with your body.
how god anointed jesus of nazareth with the holy spirit and power, and how he went around doing good and healing all who were under the power of the devil, because god was with him.
destination, or place to go to
as for the person who is quick to become  tired of his work, he will be slow to finish the house that he is making.
joaquin claims the residents of maambago as his subjects.
we’ll set out the fish trap.
in the following directives i have no praise for you, for your meetings do more harm than good.
have chills from malaria or dengue fever
as for the person who is coughing, he can no longer speak out loud because he has become hoarse.
flee
cogon grass
middle of night, or zenith of moon
they will pick up snakes with their hands; and when they drink deadly poison, it will not hurt them at all; they will place their hands on sick people, and they will get well."
stunted rice
the person who is lying in ambush, strikes his enemy when he spears him.
a kind of watermelon.
the music of harpists and musicians, flute players and trumpeters, will never be heard in you again. no workman of any trade will ever be found in you again. the sound of a millstone will never be heard in you again.
watch out for false prophets. they come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly they are ferocious wolves.
greet also the church that meets at their house. greet my dear friend epenetus, who was the first convert to christ in the province of asia.
fill or plug
those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads
some of the pharisees said, “this man is not from god, for he does not keep the sabbath.” but others asked, “how can a sinner perform such signs?” so they were divided.
jesus entered the temple courts and drove out all who were buying and selling there. he overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves.
slip off
do not be misled: "bad company corrupts good character."
the evil spirit shook the man violently and came out of him with a shriek.
to flame up and become hot (as fire)
jesus, once more deeply moved, came to the tomb. it was a cave with a stone laid across the entrance.
i have become its servant by the commission god gave me to present to you the word of god in its fullness--
if i am to go on living in the body, this will mean fruitful labor for me. yet what shall i choose? i do not know! i am torn between the two: i desire to depart and be with christ, which is better by far; but it is more necessary for you that i remain in the body.
therefore show these men the proof of your love and the reason for our pride in you, so that the churches can see it.
a kind of wood.
upon receiving such orders, he put them in the inner cell and fastened their feet in the stocks.
what's going on with you?
cebu is an island because its edge is all water.
sharp stakes
therefore i glory in christ jesus in my service to god.
we recovered from our fear of the raiders.
let no one in the field go back to get his cloak.
for i tell you that christ has become a servant of the jews on behalf of god’s truth, so that the promises made to the patriarchs might be confirmed.
jesus answered them, "is it not written in your law, 'i have said you are gods' ?
if you cut a field on the other side of a mountain and go up over the top [where] there is another field, the fields joined each other. they have come together.
to hollow out a tree
underlyingly
pronged fish spear.
the women hang around ?? the men.
“sir,” the woman said, “i can see that you are a prophet.
you will conceive and give birth to a son, and you are to call him jesus.
“as you know, the passover is two days away—and the son of man will be handed over to be crucified.”
rice seedlings springing up far apart
other
therefore encourage each other with these words.
he has performed mighty deeds with his arm; he has scattered those who are proud in their inmost thoughts.
but i have prayed for you, simon, that your faith may not fail. and when you have turned back, strengthen your brothers."
hail (lit. "hail of rain")
dry near a fire
go! i am sending you out like lambs among wolves.
when we arrived at jerusalem, the brothers and sisters received us warmly.
“while i am in the world, i am the light of the world.”
so that the man of god may be thoroughly equipped for every good work.
the tree by the water is leaning over. its tip is upside down.
swing
long, curved knife
the dead man came out, his hands and feet wrapped with strips of linen, and a cloth around his face. jesus said to them, "take off the grave clothes and let him go."
large roots of huge forest trees growing above ground
then he sent some more servants and said, ‘tell those who have been invited that i have prepared my dinner: my oxen and fattened cattle have been butchered, and everything is ready. come to the wedding banquet.’
eighty
scarcely had [someone] spoke
the person who is first to speak, that is the one who initiates the discussion.
sprinkle water on someone or something.
everyone was filled with awe at the many wonders and signs performed by the apostles.
a person who is a slave, he is a servant who is made to suffer by his leader [who gives him] lots of work.
“and about judgment, because the prince of this world now stands condemned.”
the base of a mountain, that is at the bottom of the incline which is the ending of the steep part.
simon peter, thomas (also known as didymus), nathanael from cana in galilee, the sons of zebedee, and two other disciples were together.
some time after this, jesus crossed to the far shore of the sea of galilee (that is, the sea of tiberias),
for the sinful nature desires what is contrary to the spirit, and the spirit what is contrary to the sinful nature. they are in conflict with each other, so that you do not do what you want.
cartilage appendage to ribs
language
mistake someone for another person
the hard, intact outer shell of a dead palm tree left after the pulp has rotted out.
to the holy and faithful brothers in christ at colosse: grace and peace to you from god our father.
if your love lit. breath does not become transferred to another man, i will be able to follow through to marry you.
nor to devote themselves to myths and endless genealogies. these promote controversies rather than god's work-- which is by faith.
stir
the python was curled up as it was lying in wait on the path of a pig.
nothing outside a man can make him 'unclean' by going into him. rather, it is what comes out of a man that makes him 'unclean.' "
the monkey really stinks.
pay.
“why? what crime has he committed?” asked pilate. but they shouted all the louder, “crucify him!”
by
now we know that if the earthly tent we live in is destroyed, we have a building from god, an eternal house in heaven, not built by human hands.
to take food (possible translation issue)
shield
they are like children sitting in the marketplace and calling out to each other: ‘we played the pipe for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not cry.’
and he brought him to jesus. jesus looked at him and said, “you are simon son of john. you will be called cephas” (which, when translated, is peter).
if someone purposes to blind us, they poke out our eyes.
the base of a mountain, that is at the bottom of the incline which is the ending of the steep part.
the people placed their things in a bedbasket with a lid. it won't deteriorate if it is covered with the sticky sap of a tabun fruit.
one of the high priest's servants, a relative of the man whose ear peter had cut off, challenged him, "didn't i see you with him in the olive grove?"
for this reason i, paul, the prisoner of christ jesus for the sake of you gentiles—
they came to bethsaida, and some people brought a blind man and begged jesus to touch him.
female companion
dish food
above all, love each other deeply, because love covers over a multitude of sins.
and now it is because of my hope in what god has promised our ancestors that i am on trial today.
i’ll roast the corn over a fire and even the crabs are good that way.
finally, brothers, pray for us that the message of the lord may spread rapidly and be honored, just as it was with you.
tsk
grace and peace to you from god our father and the lord jesus christ.
chaff of tiny broken rice chips (usually given to chickens)
do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moths and vermin destroy, and where thieves break in and steal.
you belong to your father, the devil, and you want to carry out your father's desire. he was a murderer from the beginning, not holding to the truth, for there is no truth in him. when he lies, he speaks his native language, for he is a liar and the father of lies.
a kind of weed with thorny leaves.
young featherless chicken slow to grow feathers
tell archippus: "see to it that you complete the work you have received in the lord."
rattan bowstring
pray or sacrific
“if you remain in me and my words remain in you, ask whatever you wish, and it will be done for you.”
kind of bolo
tobacco
tooth marks
to cease talking.
no, i beat my body and make it my slave so that after i have preached to others, i myself will not be disqualified for the prize.
turn one’s head
marriage should be honored by all, and the marriage bed kept pure, for god will judge the adulterer and all the sexually immoral.
his own full younger sibling.
jesus then left that place and went into the region of judea and across the jordan. again crowds of people came to him, and as was his custom, he taught them.
the camote has been chewed by a rat
pay
lance or open a boil or injury
turn around
the god of our ancestors raised jesus from the dead—whom you killed by hanging him on a cross.
stand still
when he gave the letter [to me], he instructed (lit. caused) [me] to add to it by word of mouth to insure that [the person] would set aside some corn [for him].
affect
therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey its evil desires.
when he said this, a dispute broke out between the pharisees and the sadducees, and the assembly was divided.
persecuted, but not abandoned; struck down, but not destroyed.
to ignore, refuse to pay attention to
this is he who was spoken of through the prophet isaiah: “a voice of one calling in the wilderness, ‘prepare the way for the lord, make straight paths for him.’”
at that time jesus, full of joy through the holy spirit, said, “i praise you, father, lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children. yes, father, for this is what you were pleased to do.
i care very little if i am judged by you or by any human court; indeed, i do not even judge myself.
kick
seek out
"then he said: 'the god of our fathers has chosen you to know his will and to see the righteous one and to hear words from his mouth.
the meaning of the sun going down is that it goes over the horizon. it goes out of sight
i went in response to a revelation and, meeting privately with those esteemed as leaders, i presented to them the gospel that i preach among the gentiles. i wanted to be sure i was not running and had not been running my race in vain.
when an older person sold his dog which wasn't yet paid for, and when the person who got that dog has paid for it, the dog's value has been returned and so the owner has been repaid because the dog has been paid for.
the angel said to me, "these words are trustworthy and true. the lord, the god of the spirits of the prophets, sent his angel to show his servants the things that must soon take place."
they arrived at ephesus, where paul left priscilla and aquila. he himself went into the synagogue and reasoned with the jews.
many
kind of millet (various grain colors: reddish-brown, black, white)
unhusked rice
you didn’t put your things in order.
he seized the dragon, that ancient serpent, who is the devil, or satan, and bound him for a thousand years.  he threw him into the abyss, and locked and sealed it over him, to keep him from deceiving the nations anymore until the thousand years were ended. after that, he must be set free for a short time.
if anyone is worried that he might not be acting honorably toward the virgin he is engaged to, and if his passions are too strong and he feels he ought to marry, he should do as he wants. he is not sinning. they should get married.
speak
to whisper.
[some manuscripts include: “however, this kind does not go out except by prayer and fasting.”]
we all crowded over there into lusogpit’s house.
long feelers or antennae as on a shrimp.
it’s andì’s fault that i suffer injury when i go on an errand for them and come across a murderer.
the manipulation of childbirth is like pushing but just gently.
when peter saw him, he asked, "lord, what about him?"
iguana
therefore put on the full armor of god, so that when the day of evil comes, you may be able to stand your ground, and after you have done everything, to stand.
going at once to jesus, judas said, “greetings, rabbi!” and kissed him.
they arrived at ephesus, where paul left priscilla and aquila. he himself went into the synagogue and reasoned with the jews.
"who are my mother and my brothers?" he asked.
night, darkness
after the two days he left for galilee.
slap or knock
small, carved wooden spoon.
scream.
if the baby (lit. child) in the abdomen has been properly positioned ahead of time, the mother will have it easier when she gives birth.
hide
are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? do all work miracles?
anyone who welcomes you welcomes me, and anyone who welcomes me welcomes the one who sent me.
he who did not spare his own son, but gave him up for us all—how will he not also, along with him, graciously give us all things?
the lord is not slow in keeping his promise, as some understand slowness. instead he is patient with you, not wanting anyone to perish, but everyone to come to repentance.
but she had her extra finger here.
deliverately sway
they said, "is this not jesus, the son of joseph, whose father and mother we know? how can he now say, 'i came down from heaven'?"
after fasting forty days and forty nights, he was hungry.
simon himself believed and was baptized. and he followed philip everywhere, astonished by the great signs and miracles he saw.
push together
when he was at the table with them, he took bread, gave thanks, broke it and began to give it to them.
you who boast in the law, do you dishonor god by breaking the law?
then jesus said to them, "don't you understand this parable? how then will you understand any parable?
to be torn
so don’t be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows.
those whom we call as slaves are the ones who are always made to work. they have a hard time.
have i now become your enemy by telling you the truth?
forgive
may he strengthen your hearts so that you will be blameless and holy in the presence of our god and father when our lord jesus comes with all his holy ones.
then he said to them, "watch out! be on your guard against all kinds of greed; a man's life does not consist in the abundance of his possessions."
don’t let anyone deceive you in any way, for that day will not come until the rebellion occurs and the man of lawlessness is revealed, the man doomed to destruction.
as you enter the home, give it your greeting.  if the home is deserving, let your peace rest on it; if it is not, let your peace return to you.
he will be delivered over to the gentiles. they will mock him, insult him and spit on him;
laundry
keep reminding them of these things. warn them before god against quarreling about words; it is of no value, and only ruins those who listen.
so christ was sacrificed once to take away the sins of many people; and he will appear a second time, not to bear sin, but to bring salvation to those who are waiting for him.
name of a dance to kobbiung accompaniment.
bathing place
therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, and in this way death came to all people, because all sinned—
wander
someone with supernatural knowledge, a seer
to throw or toss.
then, after desire has conceived, it gives birth to sin; and sin, when it is fullgrown, gives birth to death.
to make a channel or ditch.
the disciples left, went into the city and found things just as jesus had told them. so they prepared the passover.
no one who denies the son has the father; whoever acknowledges the son has the father also.
the eel does not have a tail like a fish which is at the end of its body.
a kind of small fish
nevertheless, each person should live as a believer in whatever situation the lord has assigned to them, just as god has called them. this is the rule i lay down in all the churches.
hurt
in fact, as soon as she heard about him, a woman whose little daughter was possessed by an evil spirit came and fell at his feet.
i became so involved with my sewing, [that] i forgot to cook supper.
travel across a mountain slope
as for a thermometer, the fluid (lit. water) in it falls orrises toward the top.
continue a conversation the next day.
afterward jesus appeared again to his disciples, by the sea of galilee. it happened this way:
i have a horse and someone wants to buy it , but if i don't give it because i keep my horse back ?? from selling it.
lie on one’s stomach
hired hand for taking harvest downriver by raft
to call the evil spirits to aid one.
"by what authority are you doing these things?" they asked. "and who gave you authority to do this?"
"what are you arguing with them about?" he asked.
hurry and fetch water because it will soon rain.
why are you living there [on the ground] when you have work here?
when he gave the letter [to me], he instructed ) [me] to add to it by word of mouth to insure that [the person] would set aside some corn [for him].
crosswise direction
walk noisily
he sighed deeply and said, "why does this generation ask for a miraculous sign? i tell you the truth, no sign will be given to it."
if he condemned the cities of sodom and gomorrah by burning them to ashes, and made them an example of what is going to happen to the ungodly;
tree stump
for breasts to become engorged with milk
one large fistful of something, especially food
rim or reinforcement of a basket
he gave them permission, and the evil spirits came out and went into the pigs. the herd, about two thousand in number, rushed down the steep bank into the lake and were drowned.
pull head back by yanking the hair.
when we heat water, we set it aside because we will allow the water to cool off.
gossip.
masticate it well so that it will disintegrate; continually chew it so that you can swallow it.
the crowd that followed kept shouting, "away with him!"
so when those came who were hired first, they expected to receive more. but each one of them also received a denarius.
as jesus went on from there, he saw a man named matthew sitting at the tax collector’s booth. “follow me,” he told him, and matthew got up and followed him.
tune of kobbiung or kuglung
the children of your chosen sister send their greetings.
but if you harbor bitter envy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not boast about it or deny the truth.
jesus was driving out a demon that was mute. when the demon left, the man who had been mute spoke, and the crowd was amazed.
“very truly i tell you, no servant is greater than his master, nor is a messenger greater than the one who sent him.”
abcesses
but scripture has locked up everything under the control of sin, so that what was promised, being given through faith in jesus christ, might be given to those who believe.
the apostles and elders met to consider this question.
anyone who does wrong will be repaid for his wrong, and there is no favoritism.
by the same word the present heavens and earth are reserved for fire, being kept for the day of judgment and destruction of the ungodly.
if someone is speared by a raider, the spear will pierce and go through [the body].
faint
but the jews incited the god-fearing women of high standing and the leading men of the city. they stirred up persecution against paul and barnabas, and expelled them from their region.
tell me, you who want to be under the law, are you not aware of what the law says?
the commander dismissed the young man and cautioned him, "don't tell anyone that you have reported this to me."
take turns
paul stood up, motioned with his hand and said: “fellow israelites and you gentiles who worship god, listen to me!
as he approached jerusalem and saw the city, he wept over it
cornsilk
she put her hands in the pot [to pick something up ??].
when we look at the date of a month, we need to reserve a time when nothing conflicts so that the gathering together will happen.
with this in mind, we constantly pray for you, that our god may make you worthy of his calling, and that by his power he may bring to fruition your every desire for goodness and your every deed prompted by faith.
why don’t they dig camotes?
point towards
now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law, so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole world held accountable to god.
insist
when we clear debris from the yard, anything can be used to shove aside the fallen leaves and then we carry it to a far place.
about
they stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him,
the rest said, “now leave him alone. let’s see if elijah comes to save him.”
“for them i sanctify myself, that they too may be truly sanctified.”
return
roll eyes, cross-eyed
a greedy person as someone who would eat up leftovers and not think of someone else's needs
anyone who has ears to hear ought to hear
homophone (to share the same name)
bamboo hat
the watching of the older monkeys is turned around because surprisingly it is their offspring, [the] baby monkey, which is the one to watch out for them.
make every effort to keep the unity of the spirit through the bond of peace.
then i saw another angel flying in midair, and he had the eternal gospel to proclaim to those who live on the earth—to every nation, tribe, language and people.
for even if there are so-called gods, whether in heaven or on earth (as indeed there are many “gods” and many “lords”),
we’ve returned
in addition to all this, take up the shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one.
i'm going to pick a house that is wider if it has no people living in it.
for if god did not spare angels when they sinned, but sent them to hell, putting them into gloomy dungeons to be held for judgment;
all domestic animals, [various] creatures, birds, fish (lit. [edible] creatures of the water), all have their names and that is what we use to call them by their names because that is of course how we refer to them.
some fell on rocky places, where it did not have much soil. it sprang up quickly, because the soil was shallow.
"it is written," he said to them, " 'my house will be a house of prayer' ; but you have made it 'a den of robbers.' "
or these who are here should state what crime they found in me when i stood before the sanhedrin--
have you understood all these things?” jesus asked. “yes,” they replied.
just my size.
glow
shake out
greet one another with a kiss of love. peace to all of you who are in christ.
the child draws the rambatans to himself; he doesn't want someone else to take them.
to use a fallen tree as a bridge to cross over a stream.
sore ribs, a pain in the side
the night before herod was to bring him to trial, peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, and sentries stood guard at the entrance.
“why do your disciples break the tradition of the elders? they don’t wash their hands before they eat!”
hang to one side; be off center, esp. of one's head
chocolate brown chicken
and i saw what looked like a sea of glass mixed with fire and, standing beside the sea, those who had been victorious over the beast and his image and over the number of his name. they held harps given them by god
he replied, "whether he is a sinner or not, i don't know. one thing i do know. i was blind but now i see!"
fathers, do not exasperate your children; instead, bring them up in the training and instruction of the lord.
sit cross-legged
their conduct is in accord.
come over to meet someone
that the creation itself will be liberated from its bondage to decay and brought into the freedom and glory of the children of god.
bark (as a dog corners a rat)
a [unit] used in counting
pronged arrow for shooting doves
for you yourselves know how you ought to follow our example. we were not idle when we were with you,
kind of red rice.
"after an absence of several years, i came to jerusalem to bring my people gifts for the poor and to present offerings.
attack
spirit dog said to bark at night
one person says, "from where did you transport that seed?" i say, "from maguimon. they asked for that seed which they will also propagate."
all without exception
girl.
don't you have homes to eat and drink in? or do you despise the church of god and humiliate those who have nothing? what shall i say to you? shall i praise you for this? certainly not!
squint.
and he performed great and miraculous signs, even causing fire to come down from heaven to earth in full view of men.
the abu-on [bird], isn't so white; [it's color] is mixed.
but when the apostles barnabas and paul heard of this, they tore their clothes and rushed out into the crowd, shouting:
push aside
i tell you, no! but unless you repent, you too will all perish.
is any one of you sick? he should call the elders of the church to pray over him and anoint him with oil in the name of the lord.
there’s no limit to his eating.
for everyone born of god overcomes the world. this is the victory that has overcome the world, even our faith.
pine
to catch someone in the process of doing something
and every tongue confess that jesus christ is lord, to the glory of god the father.
when there are many people, we have to squeeze in and out to get by.
wild betelnut with a smaller nut
the mature?? iguana, is the same as a kuglung instrument.
he replied, “you give them something to eat.” they answered, “we have only five loaves of bread and two fish—unless we go and buy food for all this crowd.”
for david did not ascend to heaven, and yet he said, ‘the lord said to my lord: “sit at my right hand
after this i saw another angel coming down from heaven. he had great authority, and the earth was illuminated by his splendor.
immediately after the distress of those days ‘the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from the sky, and the heavenly bodies will be shaken.’
to crawl
one of the teachers of the law came and heard them debating. noticing that jesus had given them a good answer, he asked him, "of all the commandments, which is the most important?"
bold and arrogant, these men are not afraid to slander celestial beings; yet even angels, although they are stronger and more powerful, do not bring slanderous accusations against such beings in the presence of the lord.
work
now we ask you, brothers and sisters, to acknowledge those who work hard among you, who care for you in the lord and who admonish you.
they seized peter and john and, because it was evening, they put them in jail until the next day.
to touch and lick fingers
bad or serious (as in a cough)
when the sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard him were amazed.
whatever is added to food, it is also that which is added to food.
the one who was affected [by his action] -- was directed at -- was her husband who was murdered.
then philip began with that very passage of scripture and told him the good news about jesus.
but they found out about it and fled to the lycaonian cities of lystra and derbe and to the surrounding country,
bugs can’t get into it
together with
people who say such things show that they are looking for a country of their own.
they all wept as they embraced him and kissed him.
tasteless, flavorless
what shall we say, then? shall we go on sinning so that grace may increase?
guests arriving at mealtime and being invited to eat
he began to speak boldly in the synagogue. when priscilla and aquila heard him, they invited him to their home and explained to him the way of god more adequately.
i was looking forward to the plane’s landing.
but they deliberately forget that long ago by god’s word the heavens came into being and the earth was formed out of water and by water.
his disciples replied, “lord, if he sleeps, he will get better.”
criticize
to pass out
for you have been born again, not of perishable seed, but of imperishable, through the living and enduring word of god.
because we know that the one who raised the lord jesus from the dead will also raise us with jesus and present us with you to himself.
and will pay no attention to jewish myths or to the commands of those who reject the truth.
travel downriver by raft
ogmad has washed them already.
they say (reportative speech, implying doubt)
to crumble with the fingers, mash up
the agalayan is a wide field. it is all corn.
may have power, together with all the lord’s holy people, to grasp how wide and long and high and deep is the love of christ,
stand leaves up along rock used to form a small dam in trapping fish
withdraw alone
when he heard the crowd going by, he asked what was happening.
dream.
buck
it is written: " 'as surely as i live,' says the lord, 'every knee will bow before me; every tongue will confess to god.' "
“in bethlehem in judea,” they replied, “for this is what the prophet has written:
small red bird, about the size of a sparrow
then james and john, the sons of zebedee, came to him. "teacher," they said, "we want you to do for us whatever we ask."
for though we live in the world, we do not wage war as the world does.
he must not be a recent convert, or he may become conceited and fall under the same judgment as the devil.
evenly stirred (no uncooked granules)
to poison
but when this son of yours who has squandered your property with prostitutes comes home, you kill the fattened calf for him!'
what good is it for a man to gain the whole world, yet forfeit his soul? or what can a man give in exchange for his soul?
the men of nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of jonah, and now something greater than jonah is here.
for even the son of man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."
at that time jesus said, “i praise you, father, lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children.
now a man who was lame from birth was being carried to the temple gate called beautiful, where he was put every day to beg from those going into the temple courts.
there is one body and one spirit, just as you were called to one hope when you were called;
type of long curved knife similar to a machete.
i was glad when stephanas, fortunatus and achaicus arrived, because they have supplied what was lacking from you.
if you fail to show up on the day of your return, i will expect that what you say is not valid.
travel against the wind whether on a river, lake, or ocean.
dig with claws or hands
presence of evil spirits at death feast
may the god of peace, who through the blood of the eternal covenant brought back from the dead our lord jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep,
so paul and barnabas spent considerable time there, speaking boldly for the lord, who confirmed the message of his grace by enabling them to perform signs and wonders.
if a person walks and stomps, his steps are loud and we are awakened.
as he says in hosea: “i will call them ‘my people’ who are not my people; and i will call her ‘my loved one’ who is not my loved one,”
when a pig is caught in a pig trap, the trigger is released and the wild pig is pierced.
that
with the tongue we praise our lord and father, and with it we curse men, who have been made in god's likeness.
maggot eggs.
flow out, as water from an outlet
brothers and sisters, i could not address you as people who live by the spirit but as people who are still worldly—mere infants in christ.
we will pass [close to] the edge of the cliff.
hold or carry
this is how we know that we love the children of god: by loving god and carrying out his commands.
hoard
grace and peace to you from god our father and the lord jesus christ.
whatever is added to food or soup, whether water, sardines, or vegetables
repeatedly topple
then the high priest stood up and said to jesus, “are you not going to answer? what is this testimony that these men are bringing against you?”
for when we came into macedonia, we had no rest, but we were harassed at every turn—conflicts on the outside, fears within.
if you then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your father in heaven give the holy spirit to those who ask him!"
the shirt is grey
the man without the spirit does not accept the things that come from the spirit of god, for they are foolishness to him, and he cannot understand them, because they are spiritually discerned.
they replied, “some say john the baptist; others say elijah; and still others, that one of the prophets of long ago has come back to life.”
then another angel came out of the temple and called in a loud voice to him who was sitting on the cloud, “take your sickle and reap, because the time to reap has come, for the harvest of the earth is ripe.”
as for the shoulders, its extentions are the upper arms and the arms.
the next day jesus decided to leave for galilee. finding philip, he said to him, “follow me.”
there are splotches on the body of a child when he/she is two weeks old from the time of birth. they develop from his/her milk. the splotches just go away when he is older.
if there is a child or adult who just gets up without awakening, that is [the meaning] of alimukawan to arouse from sleep without fully waking up.2to come to, from an unconscious state.
when we were still children in the past, playing was the only thing we knew about.
remember
blind
the jewish passover feast was near.
and even tried to desecrate the temple; so we seized him.
crosswise slices
his brother-in-law keeps a store.
a rooster will peck [us] if we bother their chicks.
those people are zealous to win you over, but for no good. what they want is to alienate you from us, so that you may have zeal for them.
happy
when moses heard this, he fled to midian, where he settled as a foreigner and had two sons.
tongue
hold your lips tight together
but the man who looks intently into the perfect law that gives freedom, and continues to do this, not forgetting what he has heard, but doing it--he will be blessed in what he does.
they say (reportative speech, implying doubt)
wind that [blows] in a circle.
as you help us by your prayers. then many will give thanks on our behalf for the gracious favor granted us in answer to the prayers of many.
blink the eyes and turn one's head
then jesus began to denounce the towns in which most of his miracles had been performed, because they did not repent.
all this is for your benefit, so that the grace that is reaching more and more people may cause thanksgiving to overflow to the glory of god.
if there are those who are having a sacrificial ceremony, they constantly play a rhythm on a drum. the drum which is played is beaten with sticks or one's hands.
mirror
“to the angel of the church in philadelphia write: these are the words of him who is holy and true, who holds the key of david. what he opens no one can shut, and what he shuts no one can open.
because she heard her name mentioned, she discerned that someone had spoken badly about her.
don't act inappropriately over at someone's house
thanks be to god, who delivers me through jesus christ our lord! so then, i myself in my mind am a slave to god’s law, but in my sinful nature a slave to the law of sin.
a sticky variety of bee’s wax from the non-stinging tamusan bee
it is written in the prophets: 'they will all be taught by god.' everyone who listens to the father and learns from him comes to me.
if our companion passes on the other side of a trail, we will pass on this side as we hurry to meet him.
i fell to the ground and heard a voice say to me, ‘saul! saul! why do you persecute me?’
the voice of that girl is beautiful; her tone is good.
a person had just nine pesos with which he bought a dove which he would domesticate.
fine
but he denied it. "i don't know or understand what you're talking about," he said, and went out into the entryway.
how much more valuable is a person than a sheep! therefore it is lawful to do good on the sabbath.”
first of all, you must understand that in the last days scoffers will come, scoffing and following their own evil desires.
fall head over heels
brothers-in-law doing something together
secondary forest with high, large trees
as we have already said, so now i say again: if anybody is preaching to you a gospel other than what you accepted, let them be under god’s curse!
be the one’s to do something
for we are to god the aroma of christ among those who are being saved and those who are perishing
“i am the alpha and the omega,” says the lord god, “who is, and who was, and who is to come, the almighty.”
when you have seen each other, you tell that person that you will sleep together for a while because you have been chilled by your loneliness.
galvanized iron sheet metal
filmy skin covering corn, beans, eggs, or organs
because he himself suffered when he was tempted, he is able to help those who are being tempted
three times i pleaded with the lord to take it away from me.
if a person has great authority or great knowledge, he/she is called a great person.
they are also seven kings. five have fallen, one is, the other has not yet come; but when he does come, he must remain for only a little while.
“about noon as i came near damascus, suddenly a bright light from heaven flashed around me.
to experience.
thomas said to him, "my lord and my god!"
die in childbirth.
wide-spread, far apart
jesus then left that place and went into the region of judea and across the jordan. again crowds of people came to him, and as was his custom, he taught them.
the locusts looked like horses prepared for battle. on their heads they wore something like crowns of gold, and their faces resembled human faces.
my companions saw the light, but they did not understand the voice of him who was speaking to me.
an eye condition characterized by redness; pink eye
when did we see you sick or in prison and go to visit you?’
to be jealous.
drum with fingers
rise
fourth
a fruit to ripen ahead of others such as a banana on a stalk.
when you are persecuted in one place, flee to another. truly i tell you, you will not finish going through the towns of israel before the son of man comes.
to intentionally swallow
what grieved them most was his statement that they would never see his face again. then they accompanied him to the ship.
sporadic
whatever is added to food or soup, whether water, sardines, or vegetables
for true and just are his judgments. he has condemned the great prostitute who corrupted the earth by her adulteries. he has avenged on her the blood of his servants.”
right, correct, appropriate, enough
“to the angel of the church in pergamum write: these are the words of him who has the sharp, double-edged sword.
the voice of that girl is beautiful; her tone is good.
he must manage his own family well and see that his children obey him, and he must do so in a manner worthy of full respect.
you need to persevere so that when you have done the will of god, you will receive what he has promised.
for those who are led by the spirit of god are the children of god.
you may die of hunger.
contract an itchy, sore skin disease
if someone wants to get married, he will pursue it relentlessly. he will keep on discussing it with the father until he says yes.
necklace
casually
the dog is digging because he is after the rat in the hole in the ground
if [one is] in kapugi, the water rises. in respect to trees which replace their leaves, they shed.
“we who are jews by birth and not sinful gentiles
as for a corn field, that is exclusively corn.
“come, follow me,” jesus said, “and i will send you out to fish for people.”
by this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another."
kind of white rice with dark hull.
watering of eyes from smoke or onions
and he said, “the son of man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests and the teachers of the law, and he must be killed and on the third day be raised to life.”
lizard or iguana with yellow throat
use the camote leaves to cover the water tube
therefore, anyone who swears by the altar swears by it and by everything on it.
therefore we are always confident and know that as long as we are at home in the body we are away from the lord.
a seashell
inadvertently happen
we are relying on alikas
chicken roost
rim or reinforcement of a basket
now the lord is the spirit, and where the spirit of the lord is, there is freedom.
short
make an effort for nothing
they are from the world and therefore speak from the viewpoint of the world, and the world listens to them.
tassel or blossom
tea.
give us today our daily bread.
pluck
the only thing that is left
the coming of the lawless one will be in accordance with how satan works. he will use all sorts of displays of power through signs and wonders that serve the lie,
kind of white rice with dark hull.
bow
suffer a change of circumstances
in him we were also chosen, having been predestined according to the plan of him who works out everything in conformity with the purpose of his will,  in order that we, who were the first to put our hope in christ, might be for the praise of his glory.
cause someone to pay attention
to fill out
before certain men came from james, he used to eat with the gentiles. but when they arrived, he began to draw back and separate himself from the gentiles because he was afraid of those who belonged to the circumcision group.
whatever he/she strongly desires, he/she buys it.
bank of river; beach
someone with supernatural knowledge, a seer
jesus knew their thoughts and said to them, “every kingdom divided against itself will be ruined, and every city or household divided against itself will not stand.
clear
as a fair exchange—i speak as to my children—open wide your hearts also.
when the sun goes down, darkness covers the earth.
if we are severely dizzy, we will vomit.
to possess, or own, something
very truly i tell you, a time is coming and has now come when the dead will hear the voice of the son of god and those who hear will live.
to spill out and scatter
disappointed
those who live according to the flesh have their minds set on what the flesh desires; but those who live in accordance with the spirit have their minds set on what the spirit desires.  the mind governed by the flesh is death, but the mind governed by the spirit is life and peace.
hate
move forward slowly
for god was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him,
“to the angel of the church in sardis write: these are the words of him who holds the seven spirits of god and the seven stars. i know your deeds; you have a reputation of being alive, but you are dead.
house
to quit
but some of them became obstinate; they refused to believe and publicly maligned the way. so paul left them. he took the disciples with him and had discussions daily in the lecture hall of tyrannus.
from the throne came flashes of lightning, rumblings and peals of thunder. before the throne, seven lamps were blazing. these are the seven spirits of god.
command them to do good, to be rich in good deeds, and to be generous and willing to share.
heart
and my spirit rejoices in god my savior,
if there is a black ant in the food being cooked, we will pick it out with a spoon.
the only thing he/she pays close attention tor is watching his/her companions; but then [that person] doesn't pay attention to his/her own attitudes.
establish
he would answer, "this is the news which i have to tell about our place."
“i was in the city of joppa praying, and in a trance i saw a vision. i saw something like a large sheet being let down from heaven by its four corners, and it came down to where i was.
“our ancestors had the tabernacle of the testimony with them in the wilderness. it had been made as god directed moses, according to the pattern he had seen.
sweep away
the person who is persistent and strong to work, that is an industrious person.
bloated stomach
swim on one’s back
“the one who enters by the gate is the shepherd of the sheep.”
in the same way, faith by itself, if it is not accompanied by action, is dead.
next
why is my language not clear to you? because you are unable to hear what i say.
fetish to stop rain
if you believed moses, you would believe me, for he wrote about me.
do not love the world or anything in the world. if anyone loves the world, the love of the father is not in him.
he grabs the bolo from someone.
where he stayed until the death of herod. and so was fulfilled what the lord had said through the prophet: “out of egypt i called my son.”
be scattered
"the second came and said, 'sir, your mina has earned five more.'
but god demonstrates his own love for us in this: while we were still sinners, christ died for us.
reserve
but since sexual immorality is occurring, each man should have sexual relations with his own wife, and each woman with her own husband.
stick the knife into the stump.
if you won't watch over [the children], go searching for something to eat.
“i am the good shepherd. the good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.”
he didn't allow [him] to take half of those piglets.
so the son of man is lord even of the sabbath."
say to the owner of the house he enters, 'the teacher asks: where is my guest room, where i may eat the passover with my disciples?
the jailer told paul, "the magistrates have ordered that you and silas be released. now you can leave. go in peace."
if we see a relative whom we have not yet met, we feel confident toward him.
the son of man will go just as it is written about him. but woe to that man who betrays the son of man! it would be better for him if he had not been born."
hide the truth in order to deceive.
if we are guests, it depends whether we tell the host how many days before he will let us return home.
because the holy spirit had not yet come on any of them; they had simply been baptized in the name of the lord jesus.
and he has come here with authority from the chief priests to arrest all who call on your name.”
red or reddish hues (pink, brown, orange)
touch
philip, like andrew and peter, was from the town of bethsaida.
lift up one hand
that which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked at and our hands have touched-- this we proclaim concerning the word of life.
severe infection under the skin in fingers or toes
in his right hand he held seven stars, and out of his mouth came a sharp double-edged sword. his face was like the sun shining in all its brilliance.
to timothy, my dear son: grace, mercy and peace from god the father and christ jesus our lord.
a person
be satisfied
now the hand of the lord is against you. you are going to be blind for a time, not even able to see the light of the sun.” immediately mist and darkness came over him, and he groped about, seeking someone to lead him by the hand.
we’re offended by the cold.
jesus replied, “moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. but it was not this way from the beginning.
arrange neatly
pineapple.
whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and i will raise him up at the last day.
but i have nothing definite to write to his majesty about him. therefore i have brought him before all of you, and especially before you, king agrippa, so that as a result of this investigation i may have something to write.
but by the grace of god i am what i am, and his grace to me was not without effect. no, i worked harder than all of them--yet not i, but the grace of god that was with me.
to engage in necromancy, commune with the spirits of the dead
for god is not a god of disorder but of peace.
he came to simon peter, who said to him, “lord, are you going to wash my feet?”
preserve meat by cooking without water and storing in bamboo
one-piece shirt and trousers, jumper suit
after he had left the crowd and entered the house, his disciples asked him about this parable.
for i am already being poured out like a drink offering, and the time for my departure is near.
the next day the crowd that had stayed on the opposite shore of the lake realized that only one boat had been there, and that jesus had not entered it with his disciples, but that they had gone away alone.
when we walk, we take steps.
but jesus remained silent. the high priest said to him, “i charge you under oath by the living god: tell us if you are the messiah, the son of god.”
then he took the cup, gave thanks and offered it to them, and they all drank from it.
i call god as my witness that it was in order to spare you that i did not return to corinth.
to swim overhand; to wave arms around
"do not be afraid, little flock, for your father has been pleased to give you the kingdom.
consider the people of israel: do not those who eat the sacrifices participate in the altar?
sacrifice a pig when fasting
face of a person
to move about in all directions
then came the feast of dedication at jerusalem. it was winter,
and no one pours new wine into old wineskins. if he does, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the wineskins will be ruined. no, he pours new wine into new wineskins."
bring people together
the jews who heard these words were again divided.
you, however, did not come to know christ that way
to ring, as of a bell.
or is it only i and barnabas who lack the right to not work for a living?
address to a little girl
now if we are children, then we are heirs—heirs of god and co-heirs with christ, if indeed we share in his sufferings in order that we may also share in his glory.
leaves soaked in water for bathing
black tick
for in the gospel the righteousness of god is revealed—a righteousness that is by faith from first to last, just as it is written: “the righteous will live by faith.”
when they hurled their insults at him, he did not retaliate; when he suffered, he made no threats. instead, he entrusted himself to him who judges justly.
and i know that this man—whether in the body or apart from the body i do not know, but god knows—
he answered, "have you never read what david did when he and his companions were hungry and in need?
charm for catching pigs
mustard
they were all filled with awe and praised god. “a great prophet has appeared among us,” they said. “god has come to help his people.”
kobbiung tune and dance.
this is why it says: “when he ascended on high, he took many captives and gave gifts to his people.”
out of the same mouth come praise and cursing. my brothers, this should not be.
arrow(s), or spear(s), [or] a spear trap are that which are used for hunting.
don't test your mother because it's bad.
slippers
in their effort to keep us from speaking to the gentiles so that they may be saved. in this way they always heap up their sins to the limit. the wrath of god has come upon them at last.
i won’t sleep even with you
estimate the length of the dress.
jesus went out as usual to the mount of olives, and his disciples followed him.
for whoever wants to save their life will lose it, but whoever loses their life for me will find it.
now the feast of unleavened bread, called the passover, was approaching,
steep
to flow forcefully (water under pressure, swift water)
as for a  person, [he] teaches good conduct to his offspring.
edible grub
first to those in damascus, then to those in jerusalem and in all judea, and to the gentiles also, i preached that they should repent and turn to god and prove their repentance by their deeds.
stumble over
if we confront [someone], we go to his house and there we will confront him. the [word] supmat is the same as that you are confronting (lit. facing) him because you speak to him.
sacrifice chickens before cutting rice fields for a successful harvest
as for the person who makes fire by rubbing something back and forth, [the fire] is alive if it begins to smoke.
wash them right away.
as jesus went on from there, two blind men followed him, calling out, “have mercy on us, son of david!”
therefore, if what i eat causes my brother to fall into sin, i will never eat meat again, so that i will not cause him to fall
cut vines
to commit incest.
there he found a man named aeneas, who was paralyzed and had been bedridden for eight years.
just as
to play a tune
peacemakers who sow in peace raise a harvest of righteousness.
and teaching them to obey everything i have commanded you. and surely i am with you always, to the very end of the age.”
i have indeed seen the oppression of my people in egypt. i have heard their groaning and have come down to set them free. now come, i will send you back to egypt.’
to go over horizon as the moon
going a little farther, he fell to the ground and prayed that if possible the hour might pass from him.
so keep up your courage, men, for i have faith in god that it will happen just as he told me.
if i get home first, you will be the one to fetch water.
as for the shoulders, its extentions are the upper arms and the arms.
are not five sparrows sold for two pennies ? yet not one of them is forgotten by god.
but since sexual immorality is occurring, each man should have sexual relations with his own wife, and each woman with her own husband.
call one’s dog
backbite
whoever regards one day as special does so to the lord. whoever eats meat does so to the lord, for they give thanks to god; and whoever abstains does so to the lord and gives thanks to god.
estimate the height of the tree which has not yet been felled.
if someone [loses a loved one] by death, we comfort them by our bearing of the hurt of his/her emotional pain
but the seed on good soil stands for those with a noble and good heart, who hear the word, retain it, and by persevering produce a crop.
clarify what you said
to pick up and put away things.
to be in relationship as siblings
the angel who talked with me had a measuring rod of gold to measure the city, its gates and its walls.
we know that anyone born of god does not continue to sin; the one who was born of god keeps him safe, and the evil one cannot harm him.
“just as the father knows me and i know the father—and i lay down my life for the sheep.”
brother-in-law was tossing and turning and twisting because his pain which he started experiencing yesterday was excessive.
this was now the third time jesus appeared to his disciples after he was raised from the dead.
until now you have not asked for anything in my name. ask and you will receive, and your joy will be complete.
wiggly
he got up, took his mat and walked out in full view of them all. this amazed everyone and they praised god, saying, "we have never seen anything like this!"
thunder without rain
break through
just one more supa.
an orchid.
position of the sun around one o’clock in the afternoon
"i am not possessed by a demon," said jesus, "but i honor my father and you dishonor me.
the male [rodent] was lacking [food] to eat because the female was greedy.
speak louder so that the others can hear.
during the high-priesthood of annas and caiaphas, the word of god came to john son of zechariah in the wilderness.
then jesus said to him, “get up! pick up your mat and walk.”
to dredge a river with leaves to get fish
then the disciples came to jesus in private and asked, “why couldn’t we drive it out?”
ruin and misery mark their ways,
"why don't you judge for yourselves what is right?
the center of the eggshell is hollow because the yolk is not there.
give the dove some camote
to catch on fire as field
now i rejoice in what was suffered for you, and i fill up in my flesh what is still lacking in regard to christ's afflictions, for the sake of his body, which is the church.
now to the unmarried and the widows i say: it is good for them to stay unmarried, as i do.
if anyone sees his brother commit a sin that does not lead to death, he should pray and god will give him life. i refer to those whose sin does not lead to death. there is a sin that leads to death. i am not saying that he should pray about that.
to move in multiple directions while doing something
jesus left the temple and was walking away when his disciples came up to him to call his attention to its buildings.
for to be sure, he was crucified in weakness, yet he lives by god’s power. likewise, we are weak in him, yet by god’s power we will live with him in our dealing with you.
to become unraveled
the law is only a shadow of the good things that are coming--not the realities themselves. for this reason it can never, by the same sacrifices repeated endlessly year after year, make perfect those who draw near to worship.
in the afternoon (lit. when it is afternoon already), the leaves of the baluy or lumlon [plant] are smoothed out with a corn cob so they can be tightly rolled up.
do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moths and vermin destroy, and where thieves break in and steal.
and he overthrew seven nations in canaan, giving their land to his people as their inheritance.
then one of the twelve—the one called judas iscariot—went to the chief priests
pinchers
japanese type beetle
throw something flat so that it skims
"i tell you the truth," jesus answered, "today--yes, tonight--before the rooster crows twice you yourself will disown me three times."
catfish
large fruit bat
and he is not served by human hands, as if he needed anything, because he himself gives all men life and breath and everything else.
nervous talk
in front of
i’ll watch the cooking.
what grieved them most was his statement that they would never see his face again. then they accompanied him to the ship.
but i think it is necessary to send back to you epaphroditus, my brother, fellow worker and fellow soldier, who is also your messenger, whom you sent to take care of my needs.
to develop infected sores
add rice/meat for guests when lacking
a kind of rattan
therefore let us leave the elementary teachings about christ and go on to maturity, not laying again the foundation of repentance from acts that lead to death, and of faith in god,
shortcut
as they sailed, he fell asleep. a squall came down on the lake, so that the boat was being swamped, and they were in great danger.
“we are going up to jerusalem, and the son of man will be delivered over to the chief priests and the teachers of the law. they will condemn him to death
see to it that you do not refuse him who speaks. if they did not escape when they refused him who warned them on earth, how much less will we, if we turn away from him who warns us from heaven?
you belong to your father, the devil, and you want to carry out your father's desire. he was a murderer from the beginning, not holding to the truth, for there is no truth in him. when he lies, he speaks his native language, for he is a liar and the father of lies.
tight fit
dip
do not work for food that spoils, but for food that endures to eternal life, which the son of man will give you. on him god the father has placed his seal of approval."
when the throbbing is excessive, we involuntarily cry out from the pain.
dam up water
so paul asked, “then what baptism did you receive?” “john’s baptism,” they replied.
to smother
war
if timothy comes, see to it that he has nothing to fear while he is with you, for he is carrying on the work of the lord, just as i am.
the word confront means to scold. the mother says, “why didn't you-pl. help your father?”
small abaca-harvesting knife.
when we got to rome, paul was allowed to live by himself, with a soldier to guard him.
then each of them was given a white robe, and they were told to wait a little longer, until the full number of their fellow servants, their brothers and sisters, were killed just as they had been.
moved by the spirit, he went into the temple courts. when the parents brought in the child jesus to do for him what the custom of the law required,
so the law was our guardian until christ came that we might be justified by faith.
ladder with rungs
and there was a widow in that town who kept coming to him with the plea, ‘grant me justice against my adversary.’
but not a hair of your head will perish.
i’m peeking at the chickens.
you made that effort for nothing  because you weren’t able to get any cloth.
it is as though [something] triggers our thinking.
they devour widows' houses and for a show make lengthy prayers. such men will be punished most severely."
so they set out and went from village to village, proclaiming the good news and healing people everywhere.
weep
partial damming of river to trap fish
take different roads
many will follow their shameful ways and will bring the way of truth into disrepute.
what, then, was the purpose of the law? it was added because of transgressions until the seed to whom the promise referred had come. the law was put into effect through angels by a mediator.
with respect to
type of bush with wide leaves
pull or yank
familiar spirit.
may god himself, the god of peace, sanctify you through and through. may your whole spirit, soul and body be kept blameless at the coming of our lord jesus christ.
by the power of signs and miracles, through the power of the spirit. so from jerusalem all the way around to illyricum, i have fully proclaimed the gospel of christ.
therefore god exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name,
he just [purposely] forgets it; he doesn't pay attention to it.
bless your heart for feeling lonely for me.
“fellow children of abraham and you god-fearing gentiles, it is to us that this message of salvation has been sent.
then he went out to the gateway, where another servant girl saw him and said to the people there, “this fellow was with jesus of nazareth.”
we should not commit sexual immorality, as some of them did—and in one day twenty-three thousand of them died.
the evil spirits will devour you.
rebuild a house on the same site
to plant
yellow bead
dream.
a tiny brilliant red bird with purple flocks on the head, has a long pointed black beak; said to live in a hole in the river bank
the [piece of] sharpened wood, that is the lever which is put underneath [the log which one intends to move].
then jesus left the vicinity of tyre and went through sidon, down to the sea of galilee and into the region of the decapolis.
after the reading from the law and the prophets, the leaders of the synagogue sent word to them, saying, “brothers, if you have a word of exhortation for the people, please speak.”
white
beg insistently
then thomas (also known as didymus) said to the rest of the disciples, “let us also go, that we may die with him.”
repent, then, and turn to god, so that your sins may be wiped out, that times of refreshing may come from the lord,
as soon as i send artemas or tychicus to you, do your best to come to me at nicopolis, because i have decided to winter there.
bridge
you yourselves can testify that i said, ‘i am not the messiah but am sent ahead of him.’
though you do not know him, i know him. if i said i did not, i would be a liar like you, but i do know him and keep his word.
to go after and catch
if someone comes for a visit from kapalong, he will have us meet him at the river junction.
do not be like cain, who belonged to the evil one and murdered his brother. and why did he murder him? because his own actions were evil and his brother's were righteous.
she went home and found her child lying on the bed, and the demon gone.
piglet.
those tending the pigs ran off, went into the town and reported all this, including what had happened to the demon-possessed men.
reserve or engage
but the pharisees and the teachers of the law who belonged to their sect complained to his disciples, "why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and 'sinners'?"
at that time if anyone says to you, ‘look, here is the messiah!’ or, ‘there he is!’ do not believe it.
questioned him, “why then do you baptize if you are not the messiah, nor elijah, nor the prophet?”
to winnow
and free those who all their lives were held in slavery by their fear of death.
i tell you, i will not drink from this fruit of the vine from now on until that day when i drink it new with you in my father’s kingdom.”
to internalize
dwarf
between
stretch a basket in the making, in order to shape it and make it larger
shout at the thunder and lightning to go away
stutter
the wings are beginning to sprout feathers.
after the man and woman have fed each other, they have become a couple, they have married each other.
jealous, as of a spouse
in our place, we don't show respect to someone unless they have been made a leader.
when there is someone to take care of a child, the mother can get away by herself.
so they proposed two men: joseph called barsabbas (also known as justus) and matthias.
together with
cross
if anyone speaks, he should do it as one speaking the very words of god. if anyone serves, he should do it with the strength god provides, so that in all things god may be praised through jesus christ. to him be the glory and the power for ever and ever. amen.
immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue set free, and he began to speak, praising god.
it was revealed to them that they were not serving themselves but you, when they spoke of the things that have now been told you by those who have preached the gospel to you by the holy spirit sent from heaven. even angels long to look into these things.
we hold onto the pole by which we’re tried.
to fit
i will just be seven [days] downriver.
i, paul, write this greeting in my own hand. remember my chains. grace be with you.
spear for fish or eel.
stop
"abba, father," he said, "everything is possible for you. take this cup from me. yet not what i will, but what you will."
“you call me ‘teacher’ and ‘lord,’ and rightly so, for that is what i am.”
that man should not think he will receive anything from the lord; he is a double-minded man, unstable in all he does.
a kind of yellow fish that’s short and wide
to pick up and put away things.
so we say with confidence, "the lord is my helper; i will not be afraid. what can man do to me?"
in the same way, after supper he took the cup, saying, "this cup is the new covenant in my blood; do this, whenever you drink it, in remembrance of me."
they will be the same.
carry on back.
to exclaim
rootless camotes (due to weeds)
it can’t be bent
for no word from god will ever fail.”
the clothes will be swept away.
exceedingly fierce
then everyone deserted him and fled.
the blanket is harbor for body lice because it’s fuzzy.
because of my chains, most of the brothers in the lord have been encouraged to speak the word of god more courageously and fearlessly.
what relation to lugtom is sanglit?
i have been constantly on the move. i have been in danger from rivers, in danger from bandits, in danger from my own countrymen, in danger from gentiles; in danger in the city, in danger in the country, in danger at sea; and in danger from false brothers.
if you show special attention to the man wearing fine clothes and say, "here's a good seat for you," but say to the poor man, "you stand there" or "sit on the floor by my feet,"
to withdraw to eat something alone
is this blessedness only for the circumcised, or also for the uncircumcised? we have been saying that abraham’s faith was credited to him as righteousness.
he went to nazareth, where he had been brought up, and on the sabbath day he went into the synagogue, as was his custom. he stood up to read,
they all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up twelve basketfuls of broken pieces that were left over.
keep as a pet or domesticated animal
there was also a prophet, anna, the daughter of penuel, of the tribe of asher. she was very old; she had lived with her husband seven years after her marriage,  and then was a widow until she was eighty-four. she never left the temple but worshiped night and day, fasting and praying.
i tell you the truth, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.
when they came to the place called the skull, there they crucified him, along with the criminals--one on his right, the other on his left.
if i speak in the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love, i am only a resounding gong or a clanging cymbal.
to expend great effort
for her sins are piled up to heaven, and god has remembered her crimes.
remember me; don’t forget me.
retract
lean on something with one's chest.
tongue
in the past god overlooked such ignorance, but now he commands all people everywhere to repent.
a kind of wild chicken.
after he used [the saw], he loaned it (lit. caused it to be borrowed) again to another person.
as for a guitar, it has six strings but a kuglung instrument only has two.
i may not be a trained speaker, but i do have knowledge. we have made this perfectly clear to you in every way.
have them wind each other with red [material].
uprooted tree
host
offense
as for the people who dig comotes, they dumpt the comotes into the water because they will wash them first.
and no one pours new wine into old wineskins. if he does, the new wine will burst the skins, the wine will run out and the wineskins will be ruined.
luluy has decayed teeth.
he sent still another, and that one they killed. he sent many others; some of them they beat, others they killed.
the person who slaughters a pig by cutting its throat, he cuts open the stomach because he will remove its intestines.
if there is a person who has experienced the death [of a loved one], we offer emotional comfort that we should strengthen ourselves against the emotional pain.
we have plenty of food now.
(about five thousand men were there.) but he said to his disciples, “have them sit down in groups of about fifty each.”
prop
talk
rattan
if a horse doesn't want to travel, it continually rears up as it tries to shake off the reins as it walks.
close one’s eyelids
you should not be surprised at my saying, ‘you must be born again.’
and i saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. another book was opened, which is the book of life. the dead were judged according to what they had done as recorded in the books. the sea gave up the dead that were in it, and death and hades gave up the dead that were in them, and each person was judged according to what he had done.
own
word used to shoo dogs.
transfer
pound
dogs run away with meat.
i'm going to reimburse ivy's shoes
but while they were on their way to buy the oil, the bridegroom arrived. the virgins who were ready went in with him to the wedding banquet. and the door was shut.
but in order not to weary you further, i would request that you be kind enough to hear us briefly.
then jesus said to the crowds and to his disciples:
he didn't catch the ball which was thrown because it passed him but another person was able to catch it.
edible red larvae of a beetle found in rattan
then they called them in again and commanded them not to speak or teach at all in the name of jesus.
get one’s attention
finish a discussion.
while pilate was sitting on the judge’s seat, his wife sent him this message: “don’t have anything to do with that innocent man, for i have suffered a great deal today in a dream because of him.”
we purposely float with the current as we lean on pieces of bamboo.
the first thing andrew did was to find his brother simon and tell him, “we have found the messiah” (that is, the christ).
flick off an insect
to band with metal; gold or brass trim, such as on spear
remember lot’s wife!
jesus said to them, "i tell you the truth, unless you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, you have no life in you.
to lick with the tongue
you were running a good race. who cut in on you and kept you from obeying the truth?
once more jesus put his hands on the man's eyes. then his eyes were opened, his sight was restored, and he saw everything clearly.
head
how much more severely do you think a man deserves to be punished who has trampled the son of god under foot, who has treated as an unholy thing the blood of the covenant that sanctified him, and who has insulted the spirit of grace?
jerk, as when startled
moth ball
until i make your enemies a footstool for your feet.”’
the rice which was placed in the winnowing tray will just get spilled if there are children who will mess around with it.
where, then, is boasting? it is excluded. because of what law? the law that requires works? no, because of the law that requires faith.
we’ll get slashed
produce fruit in keeping with repentance.
touch [person's] cheek.
blisters
loosen
he must not be a recent convert, or he may become conceited and fall under the same judgment as the devil.
he’s covering [his] head with a banana leaf.
when an impure spirit comes out of a person, it goes through arid places seeking rest and does not find it.
as for the person of good character, [he]  isn't a liar, he doesn't [start] scandals. he is afraid to do bad things. he humbles himself. if he is scolded, he doesn't let it bother him; he just [purposely] forgets it; he doesn't pay attention to it.
a pass, or valley between the slopes of mountains.
the misty rain, it comes from the fog which drips.
hole, as in the ground or in an object
when they are placed over the fire, we expose the leaves to the heat to wilt the leaves so that they can be used to wrap food.
red splotches on the skin of a young baby's body which disappear when the child grows older
black, sticky rice or red, sticky corn
when there was someone who killed a family, the raiders massacred them and everyone died.
who gave himself for us to redeem us from all wickedness and to purify for himself a people that are his very own, eager to do what is good.
they came to appease them and escorted them from the prison, requesting them to leave the city.
then those who were in the boat worshiped him, saying, “truly you are the son of god.”
i'll borrow [someone's] land.
to be reconciled to one another
0once you were not a people, but now you are the people of god; once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy.
“now they know that everything you have given me comes from you.”
(for that righteous man, living among them day after day, was tormented in his righteous soul by the lawless deeds he saw and heard)--
the cone-shaped fish trap is made from bamboo which is one way to catch water life.
for when there is a change of the priesthood, there must also be a change of the law.
jesus reached out his hand and touched the man. “i am willing,” he said. “be clean!” and immediately the leprosy left him.
mud, found on riverbanks
as for the broad jump, when we run, we will jump over an obstacle if there is one.
mature
“in the law moses commanded us to stone such women. now what do you say?”
such people we command and urge in the lord jesus christ to settle down and earn the food they eat.
but why am i so favored, that the mother of my lord should come to me?
i feel upset. (lit. my breath hurts.)
put pressure
but the chief priests stirred up the crowd to have pilate release barabbas instead.
live as free men, but do not use your freedom as a cover-up for evil; live as servants of god.
the center/seed which cannot be swallowed like the [seeds of] the mango or the pangi [fruit], those are the only ones which can be sucked on.
as for soot, if we happen to rub it on ourselves, our body and our clothes become black.
what did he accomplish
plural particle; "and"; "approximately"
this is how the birth of jesus the messiah came about: his mother mary was pledged to be married to joseph, but before they came together, she was found to be pregnant through the holy spirit.
just my size.
but this is to fulfill what is written in their law: 'they hated me without reason.'
anyone who claims to be in the light but hates his brother is still in the darkness.
a bagakis is a braided belt made from horse hair which has been studded with beads.
and so the jewish leaders said to the man who had been healed, “it is the sabbath; the law forbids you to carry your mat.”
command them to do good, to be rich in good deeds, and to be generous and willing to share.
you will roll them up like a robe; like a garment they will be changed. but you remain the same, and your years will never end.”
doorsill; good
do not deceive yourselves. if any one of you thinks he is wise by the standards of this age, he should become a "fool" so that he may become wise.
yet when planted, it grows and becomes the largest of all garden plants, with such big branches that the birds of the air can perch in its shade."
but if we have food and clothing, we will be content with that.
and how can anyone preach unless they are sent? as it is written: “how beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news!”
they all joined together constantly in prayer, along with the women and mary the mother of jesus, and with his brothers.
then jesus told them this parable:
he himself was not the light; he came only as a witness to the light.
all these are the beginning of birth pains.
it is not as though god’s word had failed. for not all who are descended from israel are israel.
wise
the moon goes over the horizon; it disappears.
abandon your husband because he is unable to provide for you because he will not work.
"where have you laid him?" he asked. "come and see, lord," they replied.
some women were watching from a distance. among them were mary magdalene, mary the mother of james the younger and of joses, and salome.
anyone can pass through the airstrip.
“while i was with them, i protected them and kept them safe by that name you gave me. none has been lost except the one doomed to destruction so that scripture would be fulfilled.”
planting stick; to poke or plant a stick firmly in the ground.
when you were dead in your sins and in the uncircumcision of your sinful nature, god made you alive with christ. he forgave us all our sins,
god is just: he will pay back trouble to those who trouble you
isn’t this the carpenter’s son? isn’t his mother’s name mary, and aren’t his brothers james, joseph, simon and judas?
leftover section
we will begin to cut the field at the bottom of the field.
the sixth angel sounded his trumpet, and i heard a voice coming from the horns of the golden altar that is before god
i thank god, whom i serve, as my ancestors did, with a clear conscience, as night and day i constantly remember you in my prayers.
we chase and tag our companions.
to chatter
when joseph and mary had done everything required by the law of the lord, they returned to galilee to their own town of nazareth.
perspiration
and masters, treat your slaves in the same way. do not threaten them, since you know that he who is both their master and yours is in heaven, and there is no favoritism with him.
two people holding onto something
bark of a tree
no one who lives in him keeps on sinning. no one who continues to sin has either seen him or known him.
" 'my son,' the father said, 'you are always with me, and everything i have is yours.
to ignore, not pay attention to
the hard shell, that is the body of the creatures like crabs, turtles, certain shellfish, water snails, pointed shellfish, land snails, certain edible shellfish, clams, and small clams.
my uncle is occupied by the building of his house. that is what he pays attention to first.
to work hard
and sang the song of moses the servant of god and the song of the lamb: "great and marvelous are your deeds, lord god almighty. just and true are your ways, king of the ages.
the paper will tear raggedly.
balance
do you have eyes but fail to see, and ears but fail to hear? and don't you remember?
when a pig has not yet given birth, you give some money, even one half to start with, signifying that it is a deposit to hold the piglet you have reserved.
striped eel.
you’ll starve because you carelessly threw away [the rice].
we chase and tag our companions.
but the pharisees and the teachers of the law were furious and began to discuss with one another what they might do to jesus.
come up close behind another person.
grace and peace to you from god our father and the lord jesus christ,
kind of small thin banana
if we go inside a cavern, there will be light in front of us.
shrivelled
dungus is green tobacco.  it’s name is salingsing.
and to godliness, mutual affection; and to mutual affection, love.
shiny, sleek, smooth
make something like new
to quit some activity
whose
impatient
a man in the crowd answered, "teacher, i brought you my son, who is possessed by a spirit that has robbed him of speech.
do it like this
we’re stepsister.
when jesus saw that a crowd was running to the scene, he rebuked the evil spirit. "you deaf and mute spirit," he said, "i command you, come out of him and never enter him again."
do not treat prophecies with contempt
stop over for a while and drink
“you have heard that it was said, ‘you shall not commit adultery.’
fine
run away
for my father's will is that everyone who looks to the son and believes in him shall have eternal life, and i will raise him up at the last day."
to give his people the knowledge of salvation through the forgiveness of their sins,
to encourage
as for a person who is making a house, when he set the houseposts in place, he gets something to use as a brace with which to provide support for the housepost.
jesus replied, “and why do you break the command of god for the sake of your tradition?
cave under the water;
as for the unmarried men and the unmarried women, if there is a necklace or a bracelet of a leg band which they covet, they will be quick to ask for it.
paul replied, "short time or long--i pray god that not only you but all who are listening to me today may become what i am, except for these chains."
cuddly, as a baby
i know where you live—where satan has his throne. yet you remain true to my name. you did not renounce your faith in me, not even in the days of antipas, my faithful witness, who was put to death in your city—where satan lives.
to try to scare someone
put down
ahead of time
crosswise slices
but the man who had received one bag went off, dug a hole in the ground and hid his master’s money.
toe
when he met us at assos, we took him aboard and went on to mitylene.
" 'if you can'?" said jesus. "everything is possible for him who believes."
“martha, martha,” the lord answered, “you are worried and upset about many things,
and to present her to himself as a radiant church, without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless.
be hungry
hostess
“do you see all these things?” he asked. “truly i tell you, not one stone here will be left on another; every one will be thrown down.”
to boil a liquid
to converse
have a network of connections
experience
for the unbelieving husband has been sanctified through his wife, and the unbelieving wife has been sanctified through her believing husband. otherwise your children would be unclean, but as it is, they are holy.
show compassion
vine
to commit oneself to revenge, or to get back at someone.
the men were amazed and asked, “what kind of man is this? even the winds and the waves obey him!”
i like this
with respect to
on the verge of fainting; to be discouraged
steal land from someone.
when they are placed over the fire, we expose the leaves to the heat to wilt the leaves so that they can be used to wrap food.
the roasted corn is fed to the mother who has newly given birth so that the blood clots will be broken loose and be discharged which were inside her body.
but god raised him from the dead on the third day and caused him to be seen.
and why do you worry about clothes? see how the flowers of the field grow. they do not labor or spin.
as you come to him, the living stone—rejected by humans but chosen by god and precious to him—
obtain
the tongue also is a fire, a world of evil among the parts of the body. it corrupts the whole person, sets the whole course of his life on fire, and is itself set on fire by hell.
the disciples went and woke him, saying, “master, master, we’re going to drown!” he got up and rebuked the wind and the raging waters; the storm subsided, and all was calm.
kind of white rice.
the reason i left you in crete was that you might put in order what was left unfinished and appoint elders in every town, as i directed you.
she went home and found her child lying on the bed, and the demon gone.
here a dinner was given in jesus’ honor. martha served, while lazarus was among those reclining at the table with him.
kind of white rice
as they were coming down the mountain, jesus instructed them, “don’t tell anyone what you have seen, until the son of man has been raised from the dead.”
i hate of him
then a voice told him, “get up, peter. kill and eat.”
lazy.
and said, “everyone brings out the choice wine first and then the cheaper wine after the guests have had too much to drink; but you have saved the best till now.”
to bring to life; resuscitate
metal grate or platform on the hearth for setting pots on
peter went with them, and when he arrived he was taken upstairs to the room. all the widows stood around him, crying and showing him the robes and other clothing that dorcas had made while she was still with them.
tired of
but when he saw many of the pharisees and sadducees coming to where he was baptizing, he said to them: “you brood of vipers! who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
fault
when he learned that jesus was under herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to herod, who was also in jerusalem at that time.
he will be slow to die. he has been given a long life. (lit. the placing of his breath is long.)
a person who stuffs his mouth with food makes a fistful of food and feeds himself.
when zechariah saw him, he was startled and was gripped with fear.
the water will return
some have departed from these and have turned to meaningless talk.
to be sure, sin was in the world before the law was given, but sin is not charged against anyone’s account where there is no law.
entangle
to insult
run swiftly, gallop
to be set free or released from captivity
to die before one harvests his field
but they laughed at him.
so he came to a town in samaria called sychar, near the plot of ground jacob had given to his son joseph.
the abu-on is a large bird which lives is the forest.
if the ground is on a downward incline, the water will flow.
drain (canal to drain water from pool to catch fish)
take care that what the prophets have said does not happen to you:
to be excited as someone about to ride in an airplane for the first time
you blind men! which is greater: the gift, or the altar that makes the gift sacred?
"are you the king of the jews?" asked pilate. "yes, it is as you say," jesus replied.
twisted
to have become pregnant on someone (such as the male spouse)
he is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not only for ours but also for the sins of the whole world.
the flavor is the same because it is astringent.
people were also bringing babies to jesus for him to place his hands on them. when the disciples saw this, they rebuked them.
kind of edible tree fruit
yet when planted, it grows and becomes the largest of all garden plants, with such big branches that the birds of the air can perch in its shade."
i, tertius, who wrote down this letter, greet you in the lord.
as for you, you were dead in your transgressions and sins,
when there are many people, we have to squeeze in and out to get by.
for the sun rises with scorching heat and withers the plant; its blossom falls and its beauty is destroyed. in the same way, the rich man will fade away even while he goes about his business.
boldly and without hindrance he preached the kingdom of god and taught about the lord jesus christ.
“he will glorify me because it is from me that he will receive what he will make known to you.”
when you fast, do not look somber as the hypocrites do, for they disfigure their faces to show others they are fasting. truly i tell you, they have received their reward in full.
there we found some brothers who invited us to spend a week with them. and so we came to rome.
so if anyone tells you, ‘there he is, out in the wilderness,’ do not go out; or, ‘here he is, in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it.
while peter was still speaking these words, the holy spirit came on all who heard the message.
for then there will be great distress, unequaled from the beginning of the world until now—and never to be equaled again.
in the one case, the tenth is collected by men who die; but in the other case, by him who is declared to be living.
it shone with the glory of god, and its brilliance was like that of a very precious jewel, like a jasper, clear as crystal.
then christ would have had to suffer many times since the creation of the world. but now he has appeared once for all at the end of the ages to do away with sin by the sacrifice of himself.
the path of the highway which goes to sinuda, it is always twisting and turning.
attentive
take someone's place
he came to jesus at night and said, “rabbi, we know that you are a teacher who has come from god. for no one could perform the signs you are doing if god were not with him.”
those who had arrested jesus took him to caiaphas the high priest, where the teachers of the law and the elders had assembled.
let us not become weary in doing good, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up.
to the jews i became like a jew, to win the jews. to those under the law i became like one under the law (though i myself am not under the law), so as to win those under the law.
and, as another scripture says, "they will look on the one they have pierced."
since he was not able to pay, the master ordered that he and his wife and his children and all that he had be sold to repay the debt.
run out of options
when the clouds become black/dark, the sky becomes dark.
it is still new material.
when the gentiles heard this, they were glad and honored the word of the lord; and all who were appointed for eternal life believed.
we had not yet discovered the good path.
unravel as thread of a net or woven material
for as jonah was a sign to the ninevites, so also will the son of man be to this generation.
say
if there are a lot of dirty spider webs, we brush them off with a broom so that they will be removed.
likewise, every good tree bears good fruit, but a bad tree bears bad fruit.  a good tree cannot bear bad fruit, and a bad tree cannot bear good fruit.
to massacre; to die or perish as of many
close, as a flower in the afternoon
since what may be known about god is plain to them, because god has made it plain to them.
soup, broth
then peter remembered the word jesus had spoken: “before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times.” and he went outside and wept bitterly.
you do not realize that it is better for you that one man die for the people than that the whole nation perish."
she is absorbed in her praying so that her good thoughts will continue.
the spirit shrieked, convulsed him violently and came out. the boy looked so much like a corpse that many said, "he's dead."
they weren't able to tell me another word [for the word aguanta “endure”.]
one's stomach to feel uncomfortable
bless those who persecute you; bless and do not curse.
when the raft passed through the shallow water, the rattan which was used for holding it together was chewed off and severed by the stones.
she will give birth to a son, and you are to give him the name jesus, because he will save his people from their sins.”
if we are taking someone into custody, we say, “don’t resist because you are caught and already surrounded.”
the older sibling has the younger sibling lead on the trail.
scratch an itch
simultaneously
as for people who swim underwater, [they] hold their breath as they swim underwater as they search for fish
not that i have already obtained all this, or have already been made perfect, but i press on to take hold of that for which christ jesus took hold of me.
lose, be lost
andi and her companion will blame me.
parent-in-law or in-law relatives
bow and arrow set.
[the expression] doesn't mean that one's love is lacking, it refers to [the fact that] a someone feels very sad
just one
the nations were angry, and your wrath has come. the time has come for judging the dead, and for rewarding your servants the prophets and your people who revere your name, both great and small—and for destroying those who destroy the earth.”
now about the collection for god's people: do what i told the galatian churches to do.
turn on one's side, edge
many
fire
he did not discriminate between us and them, for he purified their hearts by faith.
remain undeveloped, as a runt
plain red material used for blouses
in the same way the chief priests and the teachers of the law mocked him among themselves. "he saved others," they said, "but he can't save himself!
for who is greater, the one who is at the table or the one who serves? is it not the one who is at the table? but i am among you as one who serves.
then came the day of unleavened bread on which the passover lamb had to be sacrificed.
“as the time drew near for god to fulfill his promise to abraham, the number of our people in egypt had greatly increased.
chicken disease that causes death
to set up a pig trap
i tell you, i will not drink from this fruit of the vine from now on until that day when i drink it new with you in my father’s kingdom.”
the disciples were amazed at his words. but jesus said again, "children, how hard it is to enter the kingdom of god!
in the afternoon, the leaves of the baluy are smoothed out and flattened with a corn cob so they can be tightly rolled up.
we will build a fire and put those [red pepper] fruits in the fire and then we will hurriedly get out because we will inadvertently breathe in the stinging [smoke] and we will be afflicted by a cough in which we will frequently go into coughing spasms when we cough.
jesus left the synagogue and went to the home of simon. now simon’s mother-in-law was suffering from a high fever, and they asked jesus to help her.
don’t be in physical contact with me because you will catch my illness.
then he said, "jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom. "
play
i saw the holy city, the new jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from god, prepared as a bride beautifully dressed for her husband.
stay in one house while visiting, not go around
on the contrary, they recognized that i had been entrusted with the task of preaching the gospel to the uncircumcised, just as peter had been to the circumcised.
no longer as a slave, but better than a slave, as a dear brother. he is very dear to me but even dearer to you, both as a man and as a brother in the lord.
spit
this ritual to remove a charm, it is [performed by] sacrificing to the spirits
but jesus knew what they were thinking and said to the man with the shriveled hand, “get up and stand in front of everyone.” so he got up and stood there.
to have social dealings or business with
“truly i tell you,” jesus said to them, “no one who has left home or wife or brothers or sisters or parents or children for the sake of the kingdom of god
to you
whatever town or village you enter, search there for some worthy person and stay at their house until you leave.
if i fought wild beasts in ephesus for merely human reasons, what have i gained? if the dead are not raised, "let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die."
someone saw honey bees and he pointed them out to his companion.
this is the one about whom it is written: ‘i will send my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way before you.’
extend
kind of taro with white stalks
an ulcer or sore with raised edges
and i confer on you a kingdom, just as my father conferred one on me,
“lord,” they answered, “we want our sight.”
necklace attached to ear plugs
the monkey eats an awful lot
they will be punished with everlasting destruction and shut out from the presence of the lord and from the glory of his might
he who has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says to the churches."
after paul had seen the vision, we got ready at once to leave for macedonia, concluding that god had called us to preach the gospel to them.
wild edible mushroom
anxious
the sand by the ocean glistens.
saying to them, "go to the village ahead of you, and just as you enter it, you will find a colt tied there, which no one has ever ridden. untie it and bring it here.
jesus answered, “are there not twelve hours of daylight? anyone who walks in the daytime will not stumble, for they see by this world’s light.”
after we had been there a number of days, a prophet named agabus came down from judea.
you’ve been affected by manogò.
then he left the crowd and went into the house. his disciples came to him and said, “explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field.”
to give attention to something
this is also why you pay taxes, for the authorities are god’s servants, who give their full time to governing.
for i testify that they gave as much as they were able, and even beyond their ability. entirely on their own,
jesus answered, “it is said: ‘do not put the lord your god to the test.’”
since they could not get him to jesus because of the crowd, they made an opening in the roof above jesus and, after digging through it, lowered the mat the paralyzed man was lying on.
some wanted to seize him, but no one laid a hand on him.
fan, as with a hand fan
rub off, as kernels of corn; fall out, as baby teeth
but in the days when the seventh angel is about to sound his trumpet, the mystery of god will be accomplished, just as he announced to his servants the prophets.”
we will be able to fil upl [our baskets] when harvesting.
light up, as a lamp or flashlight
that which triggered grief in the mother of the child who had died was when she saw the id of her child.
move to one side
other side, opposite side
exceed, as in height
if there is land which is left over by water which has flooded, that is what has become isolated.
but god raised him from the dead on the third day and caused him to be seen.
when jesus saw him lying there and learned that he had been in this condition for a long time, he asked him, “do you want to get well?”
f we have forgotten [where] something is, we keep searching as we look for it until we are able to find it.
it was the same in the days of lot. people were eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting and building.
“do you see all these things?” he asked. “truly i tell you, not one stone here will be left on another; every one will be thrown down.”
our dear friend luke, the doctor, and demas send greetings.
now to him who is able to establish you by my gospel and the proclamation of jesus christ, according to the revelation of the mystery hidden for long ages past,
the holy spirit also testifies to us about this. first he says:
a person, if he has something to tell his companion, he will just whisper what he is saying into the ear of his companion whatever it is they are hiding and just [the] two of them know about their agreement.
and that in this matter no one should wrong or take advantage of a brother or sister. the lord will punish all those who commit such sins, as we told you and warned you before.
slip inadvertently
the [piece of] wood which is a lever, that is the thing used for leverage is put beneath [the log which one intends to move]
ok go ahead
chew meat from bone
regarding if we had a friend with whom we had a good relationship but if [someone sings] his song but he is no longer on earth, you will be caused to think about him when you hear that song [which he used to sing] when he was still alive.
it is for freedom that christ has set us free. stand firm, then, and do not let yourselves be burdened again by a yoke of slavery.
ignore
accomplish, finish
“say to daughter zion, ‘see, your king comes to you, gentle and riding on a donkey, and on a colt, the foal of a donkey.’”
follow a trail
yolk of egg
secure
moses thought that his own people would realize that god was using him to rescue them, but they did not.
but god demonstrates his own love for us in this: while we were still sinners, christ died for us.
then the disciple whom jesus loved said to peter, “it is the lord!” as soon as simon peter heard him say, “it is the lord,” he wrapped his outer garment around him (for he had taken it off) and jumped into the water.
he told her, “go, call your husband and come back.”
many have undertaken to draw up an account of the things that have been fulfilled among us,
all who were sitting in the sanhedrin looked intently at stephen, and they saw that his face was like the face of an angel.
we build a fire there in the middle of the cornfield and put the fruit of the hot peppers into the fire.
if you suffer, it should not be as a murderer or thief or any other kind of criminal, or even as a meddler.
they spoke about his departure, which he was about to bring to fulfillment at jerusalem.
woven bamboo basket
take a long time.
to accompany someone or something
bend in river or road.
after jesus and his disciples arrived in capernaum, the collectors of the two-drachma temple tax came to peter and asked, “doesn’t your teacher pay the temple tax?”
are they servants of christ? (i am out of my mind to talk like this.) i am more. i have worked much harder, been in prison more frequently, been flogged more severely, and been exposed to death again and again.
therefore, my dear friends, flee from idolatry.
cornfield
jessica just wanted to claim a large cluster of lansones for herself.
he who has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says to the churches."
but many who saw them leaving recognized them and ran on foot from all the towns and got there ahead of them.
the god and father of the lord jesus, who is to be praised forever, knows that i am not lying.
to leave behind
we will be quick to return home because the sun will go down.
aware of this, jesus withdrew from that place. a large crowd followed him, and he healed all who were ill.
peter knocked at the outer entrance, and a servant named rhoda came to answer the door.
hostess
to be healthy
they were on their way up to jerusalem, with jesus leading the way, and the disciples were astonished, while those who followed were afraid. again he took the twelve aside and told them what was going to happen to him.
all those who heard him were astonished and asked, “isn’t he the man who raised havoc in jerusalem among those who call on this name? and hasn’t he come here to take them as prisoners to the chief priests?”
this
he is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not only for ours but also for the sins of the whole world.
from noon until three in the afternoon darkness came over all the land.
is the cat perhaps older than the horse?
just then a woman who had been subject to bleeding for twelve years came up behind him and touched the edge of his cloak.  she said to herself, “if i only touch his cloak, i will be healed.”
brilliant red bird (same as binti)
depend on
they have power to shut up the heavens so that it will not rain during the time they are prophesying; and they have power to turn the waters into blood and to strike the earth with every kind of plague as often as they want.
throw something at someone or something.
we’ll point out the chickens to her later on.
to abandon
however, i consider my life worth nothing to me, if only i may finish the race and complete the task the lord jesus has given me--the task of testifying to the gospel of god's grace.
crocodiles bite by snapping.
jesus did not answer a word. so his disciples came to him and urged him, “send her away, for she keeps crying out after us.”
anuay is daddy’s stepchild.
then jesus declared, “i, the one speaking to you—i am he.”
layered as one coil on top of another.
i have declared to both jews and greeks that they must turn to god in repentance and have faith in our lord jesus.
how great is the love the father has lavished on us, that we should be called children of god! and that is what we are! the reason the world does not know us is that it did not know him.
“i baptize with water,” john replied, “but among you stands one you do not know.
fly away
such people we command and urge in the lord jesus christ to settle down and earn the food they eat.
float on the surface, as of a dead fish
i thank god that i speak in tongues more than all of you.
bright
the younger one said to his father, 'father, give me my share of the estate.' so he divided his property between them.
yet even then their testimony did not agree.
cross
if we meet someone along the trail and their child is crying and we help comfort him, that is an example of treating a child well.
but after the three and a half days the breath of life from god entered them, and they stood on their feet, and terror struck those who saw them.
bark (as a dog corners a rat)
“no,” said peter, “you shall never wash my feet.” jesus answered, “unless i wash you, you have no part with me.”
as for that person who is persistent, he keeps coming back until he is able to get that for which he was begging. it's as though the person from whom he is making a request is forced [to give it].
kind of shrimp.
during the high-priesthood of annas and caiaphas, the word of god came to john son of zechariah in the wilderness.
the talabubung, they are companions of the evil spirits. those are the ones who are owners who live in the mountains, baliti trees, cliffs and waterfalls.
request for repayment of a brideprice
mud fish
point towards
you won't be able to take it until there is something to use as a guarantee which makes the agreement about when you will pay the remainder.
while he was still speaking, a bright cloud covered them, and a voice from the cloud said, “this is my son, whom i love; with him i am well pleased. listen to him!”
there will be no more night. they will not need the light of a lamp or the light of the sun, for the lord god will give them light. and they will reign for ever and ever.
therefore let all israel be assured of this: god has made this jesus, whom you crucified, both lord and messiah.”
but that if a woman has long hair, it is her glory? for long hair is given to her as a covering.
large bamboo slat container for carrying grain
but what does scripture say? “get rid of the slave woman and her son, for the slave woman’s son will never share in the inheritance with the free woman’s son.”
if a person is shopping in a big store, he is distracted from making a purchase because of seeing so many things.
the rodent that lives here in the house do not make a mound living quarters because they make a nest in the house.
"and when i broke the seven loaves for the four thousand, how many basketfuls of pieces did you pick up?" they answered, "seven."
peter declared, "even if all fall away, i will not."
he has delivered us from such a deadly peril, and he will deliver us. on him we have set our hope that he will continue to deliver us,
after they had further proclaimed the word of the lord and testified about jesus, peter and john returned to jerusalem, preaching the gospel in many samaritan villages.
day before yesterday
" 'if you can'?" said jesus. "everything is possible for him who believes."
as for a person who is able to do a miracle, he has power to do something amazing.
the kingdom of heaven is like a king who prepared a wedding banquet for his son.
they said to you, "in the last times there will be scoffers who will follow their own ungodly desires."
so do what we tell you. there are four men with us who have made a vow.
when they came to the other disciples, they saw a large crowd around them and the teachers of the law arguing with them.
cut chips out
consequently, whoever rebels against the authority is rebelling against what god has instituted, and those who do so will bring judgment on themselves.
go away for a period of time to test one's love
from whom every family in heaven and on earth derives its name.
as for the lawa-an tree, when there is a lump of sap on the lawa-an tree, when it is hardened, that is the resin which can be made into a light.
squeak, as a rat
there is power in the lightning because it is able to set trees on fire.
agot-ot soil is red and gooey. it is used to make clay pots.
planting stick.
container
to experience or encounter.
all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate the people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
she would say that her rice will be wasted because she cannot finish weeding
at that time the son born according to the flesh persecuted the son born by the power of the spirit. it is the same now.
the feathery chicken discarded her young when she was about to lay again.
in the same way, good deeds are obvious, and even those that are not obvious cannot remain hidden forever.
i know your deeds, your love and faith, your service and perseverance, and that you are now doing more than you did at first.
something with a lot of hair or feathers; hairy, furry, feathery
"his master replied, 'i will judge you by your own words, you wicked servant! you knew, did you, that i am a hard man, taking out what i did not put in, and reaping what i did not sow?
mortar for pounding rice
the tails of the piglets wiggle as they move about.
others said, "he is the christ."
when the [ruver] dries up, there is no more water because it has become dry.
and since we have a great priest over the house of god,
anna fell behind her companions on the path because she could not keep up because her legs were short.
slanderers, god-haters, insolent, arrogant and boastful; they invent ways of doing evil; they disobey their parents;
his disciples answered, “where could we get enough bread in this remote place to feed such a crowd?”
forbid
to spear
some of them, however, men from cyprus and cyrene, went to antioch and began to speak to greeks also, telling them the good news about the lord jesus.
the pharisees, who loved money, heard all this and were sneering at jesus.
moreover, demons came out of many people, shouting, “you are the son of god!” but he rebuked them and would not allow them to speak, because they knew he was the messiah.
swing
no matter how much money you are short , you are the one who will decide how much money to give [to me].
the jews answered him, "aren't we right in saying that you are a samaritan and demon-possessed?"
refer to
the child who is slow to finish what he was given to eat, he is hoarding his food.
ponder
in his humiliation he was deprived of justice. who can speak of his descendants? for his life was taken from the earth.”
and i have the same hope in god as these men, that there will be a resurrection of both the righteous and the wicked.
i had to eat some food to temporarily satiate my hunger.
kind of weed that emits an irritating gas
white
now john's disciples and the pharisees were fasting. some people came and asked jesus, "how is it that john's disciples and the disciples of the pharisees are fasting, but yours are not?"
and will give our attention to prayer and the ministry of the word.”
if there is someone who collects payment for a horse but it has been sold on credit, the one who has received the horse can use anything for payment.
your
if i take part in the meal with thankfulness, why am i denounced because of something i thank god for?
then he returned to his disciples and found them sleeping. "simon," he said to peter, "are you asleep? could you not keep watch for one hour?
ask for something; request; beg
she will take care of her child while the mother is working.  she will hold the child on her lap.  have it nurse.
i will destine you to poverty because you did not treat me well.
for it is written that abraham had two sons, one by the slave woman and the other by the free woman.
therefore, as it is written: "let him who boasts boast in the lord."
news about him spread all over syria, and people brought to him all who were ill with various diseases, those suffering severe pain, the demon-possessed, those having seizures, and the paralyzed; and he healed them.
are not five sparrows sold for two pennies ? yet not one of them is forgotten by god.
what
and masters, treat your slaves in the same way. do not threaten them, since you know that he who is both their master and yours is in heaven, and there is no favoritism with him.
and he said to him, “i will give you all their authority and splendor; it has been given to me, and i can give it to anyone i want to.
he who descended is the very one who ascended higher than all the heavens, in order to fill the whole universe.)
that is the person who is talkative who is continually speaking, the one who doesn’t hesitate to speak
middle of the night
to express meaning
there is a kind of rain which we call saginwalu.
jesus replied, "let us go somewhere else--to the nearby villages--so i can preach there also. that is why i have come."
leaving that place, jesus withdrew to the region of tyre and sidon.
to curl up
then saul, who was also called paul, filled with the holy spirit, looked straight at elymas and said,
tune of kobbiung or kuglung
to try
when it had been a long time and he was repeatedly stealing, it became known by the people that it was true that he was the one who had taken
at the end of harvesting sweet potatoes, when the sweet potatoes are washed in the river/creek (lit. water), we cut off the roots at the tips
to take someone somewhere for some purpose
the master commended the dishonest manager because he had acted shrewdly. for the people of this world are more shrewd in dealing with their own kind than are the people of the light.
carefully
but they could not stand up against the wisdom the spirit gave him as he spoke.
and i heard the altar respond: “yes, lord god almighty, true and just are your judgments.”
different
boiled corn on the cob.
to harden, stiffen, as in rigor mortis
the dead man came out, his hands and feet wrapped with strips of linen, and a cloth around his face. jesus said to them, "take off the grave clothes and let him go."
edible grub
whoever believes in the son has eternal life, but whoever rejects the son will not see life, for god’s wrath remains on them.
the
but one of his disciples, judas iscariot, who was later to betray him, objected,
a white bird which dwells in a muddy area.
all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate the people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
your kingdom come, your will be done, on earth as it is in heaven.
i am going to send you what my father has promised; but stay in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high."
if there are children who become ill who are often bathing in the river, the father says, “see. you have become ill from a spirit source.”
guess
agrippa said to festus, "this man could have been set free if he had not appealed to caesar."
we prepare ourselves ahead of time. it's as if we have had an intuitive warning.
when he arrived in galilee, the galileans welcomed him. they had seen all that he had done in jerusalem at the passover festival, for they also had been there.
that's all right because i will just return soon.
“lord, have mercy on my son,” he said. “he has seizures and is suffering greatly. he often falls into the fire or into the water.
steal.
they came out of the tombs after jesus’ resurrection and went into the holy city and appeared to many people.
and that he appeared to cephas, and then to the twelve.
if we are severely dizzy, we will vomit.
she has no veins yet.
it is true that some preach christ out of envy and rivalry, but others out of goodwill. the latter do so in love, knowing that i am put here for the defense of the gospel. the former preach christ out of selfish ambition, not sincerely, supposing that they can stir up trouble for me while i am in chains.
jesus replied, “to be sure, elijah comes and will restore all things.
to savor
halfway point
a mother leaves rice behind for gruel to be fed to her child.
what’s the matter with you?
head louse
intersect
to have small thighs
now there were staying in jerusalem god-fearing jews from every nation under heaven.
if there is a landslide (lit. ground which landslides), the trees become uprooted and fall.
sunny, dry weather
he chose to give us birth through the word of truth, that we might be a kind of firstfruits of all he created.
"if you are the christ, " they said, "tell us."
the chicken is bled on the altar.
and this is my covenant with them when i take away their sins."
as for the kisulà plant, its body is like upu and its fruit is long and grooved.
prediction
“come, follow me,” jesus said, “and i will send you out to fish for people.”
the child who nurses and doesn't burp, it will happen to vomit up the milk.
they’ll make her nervous if they’re noisy.
let the word of christ dwell in you richly as you teach and admonish one another with all wisdom, and as you sing psalms, hymns and spiritual songs with gratitude in your hearts to god.
there are seven day(s) in a week.
i swung the rope around three times and then it made a loud snapping sound.
stab oneself
plant camotes and rice
then peter came to himself and said, “now i know without a doubt that the lord has sent his angel and rescued me from herod’s clutches and from everything the jewish people were hoping would happen.”
sass one’s elders
to be angry, fed up
he chose the lowly things of this world and the despised things--and the things that are not--to nullify the things that are,
and put everything under his feet.? in putting everything under him, god left nothing that is not subject to him. yet at present we do not see everything subject to him.
i have given her time to repent of her immorality, but she is unwilling.
this was now the third time jesus appeared to his disciples after he was raised from the dead.
to stress or emphasize something spoken.
pick out, as an ant from food
you start off first.
dear children, keep yourselves from idols.
make a mistake.
speak to one another with psalms, hymns and spiritual songs. sing and make music in your heart to the lord,
chose to stand rather than sit when talking.
small unit
i ask you to receive her in the lord in a way worthy of his people and to give her any help she may need from you, for she has been the benefactor of many people, including me.
repetitive action; again
when it is still daytime and it has begun to thunder without rain, we hear thunder when it is not yet raining.
a kind of sugarcane.
then jesus told them, "you are going to have the light just a little while longer. walk while you have the light, before darkness overtakes you. the man who walks in the dark does not know where he is going.
a red multicolored chicken went wild and changed into a wild chicken.
pointed or having tapering sides, such as a mountain peak or pencil tip
however, if you suffer as a christian, do not be ashamed, but praise god that you bear that name.
a covering, such as a blanket or mat
shed
to the chosen lady and her children, whom i love in the truth--and not i only, but also all who know the truth-- because of the truth, which lives in us and will be with us forever:
the jabbing pole was fitted together because it was extended.
therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, and in this way death came to all people, because all sinned—
to be angry, fed up
i do not say this to condemn you; i have said before that you have such a place in our hearts that we would live or die with you.
the po-it fish, the mudfish and the catfish are directly born in a live state when they give birth.
then peter stood up with the eleven, raised his voice and addressed the crowd: “fellow jews and all of you who live in jerusalem, let me explain this to you; listen carefully to what i say.
hide the truth in order to deceive.
just as paul was about to speak, gallio said to them, “if you jews were making a complaint about some misdemeanor or serious crime, it would be reasonable for me to listen to you.
get rid of the old yeast, so that you may be a new unleavened batch—as you really are. for christ, our passover lamb, has been sacrificed.
he is before all things, and in him all things hold together.
behave in such a way as to upset others
shallow.
bugs can’t get into it
those who have believing masters should not show them disrespect just because they are fellow believers. instead, they should serve them even better because their masters are dear to them as fellow believers and are devoted to the welfare of their slaves. these are the things you are to teach and insist on.
then all the virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps.
old
go in and out of a ladder
but the one who is rich should take pride in his low position, because he will pass away like a wild flower.
wisdom
to sit in such a manner as to be improperly exposed
to which of the angels did god ever say, “sit at my right hand until i make your enemies a footstool for your feet”?
the sabandal person is always upsetting his companion and is a very troublesome person.
what shall we conclude then? do we have any advantage? not at all! for we have already made the charge that jews and gentiles alike are all under the power of sin.
witness to the innocence or guilt of someone
rapids of a river.
next year.
this is how it will be at the end of the age. the angels will come and separate the wicked from the righteous
“or ‘who will descend into the deep?’” (that is, to bring christ up from the dead).
his affection for someone has become focused (lit. arranged). as for that affection, there is just one girl whom he loves. that is the source of his getting married [to her].
he was a good man, full of the holy spirit and faith, and a great number of people were brought to the lord.
having canceled the written code, with its regulations, that was against us and that stood opposed to us; he took it away, nailing it to the cross.
blessed and holy are those who have part in the first resurrection. the second death has no power over them, but they will be priests of god and of christ and will reign with him for a thousand years.
flock to
sleep deprived
" 'sir,' the servant said, 'what you ordered has been done, but there is still room.'
the life appeared; we have seen it and testify to it, and we proclaim to you the eternal life, which was with the father and has appeared to us.
while evil men and impostors will go from bad to worse, deceiving and being deceived.
the samaritan woman said to him, “you are a jew and i am a samaritan woman. how can you ask me for a drink?” (for jews do not associate with samaritans.)
as they were shouting and throwing off their cloaks and flinging dust into the air,
lipstick.
for the son of man is lord of the sabbath.”
chop sugarcane into short lengths for eating.
when a pig has not yet given birth, you give some money, even one half to start with, signifying that it is a deposit to hold the piglet you have reserved.
on hearing this, jesus said, “it is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick.
tell us then, what is your opinion? is it right to pay the imperial tax to caesar or not?”
benita married as a child.
a kind of small fish
do not get any gold or silver or copper to take with you in your belts—
horse or dog fight
to wrap up and bind together
"what is truth?" pilate asked. with this he went out again to the jews and said, "i find no basis for a charge against him.
to change one thing into something else
for the sun rises with scorching heat and withers the plant; its blossom falls and its beauty is destroyed. in the same way, the rich man will fade away even while he goes about his business.
sing a story
they presented these men to the apostles, who prayed and laid their hands on them.
when all the people who had gathered to witness this sight saw what took place, they beat their breasts and went away
hip
"he replied, 'i tell you that to everyone who has, more will be given, but as for the one who has nothing, even what he has will be taken away.
i'm going to ask how much she will have [me] give her in return
fast.
if you throw away trash, you take it to the receptacle.
he replied, “because the knowledge of the secrets of the kingdom of heaven has been given to you, but not to them.
short eel
a kind of long, tubular snail shell used for making lime.
to those who by persistence in doing good seek glory, honor and immortality, he will give eternal life.
a large forest bird with a red head crest and long tail feathers.
shoulder bone or joint
it is not to angels that he has subjected the world to come, about which we are speaking.
anus
a few days later, when jesus again entered capernaum, the people heard that he had come home.
completed
light up, as a lamp or flashlight
some of the pharisees in the crowd said to jesus, "teacher, rebuke your disciples!"
he will be great and will be called the son of the most high. the lord god will give him the throne of his father david,
he told them: “take nothing for the journey—no staff, no bag, no bread, no money, no extra shirt.
from the days of john the baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven has been subjected to violence, and violent people have been raiding it.
doe (female deer)
alternate legs or arms when walking
but he answered his father, 'look! all these years i've been slaving for you and never disobeyed your orders. yet you never gave me even a young goat so i could celebrate with my friends.
a chicken who is ill, its comb darkens.
philip, however, appeared at azotus and traveled about, preaching the gospel in all the towns until he reached caesarea.
feed a fire
you are called foreigners here in the philippines because you are subjects of another country.
i became a servant of this gospel by the gift of god’s grace given me through the working of his power.
when we are buying something, we look at it carefully.
purchase transaction
it’s improbable that he goes, for he isn’t successful.
least flycatcher, brown creeper.
blow
help each other
since the harbor was unsuitable to winter in, the majority decided that we should sail on, hoping to reach phoenix and winter there. this was a harbor in crete, facing both southwest and northwest.
the commander went to paul and asked, "tell me, are you a roman citizen?" "yes, i am," he answered.
eat by oneself or to serve oneself
to pull, release, let loose, let go
a dog who is hunting a pig smells the footprints of the pig and then follows the scent.
he doesn't wait to be told [to do something].
to the holy and faithful brothers in christ at colosse: grace and peace to you from god our father.
the fruit of the lansones which are thick are clustered together.
someone places a noose beside the nest of a dove. then he shooed the dove and then the neck of the dove was caught in the noose because the noose tightened around its neck.
this is the confidence we have in approaching god: that if we ask anything according to his will, he hears us.
stretch a basket in the making, in order to shape it and make it larger
be careful, however, that the exercise of your rights does not become a stumbling block to the weak.
but the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them; in those days they will fast."
gnaw, as a dog gnaws a bone
to suck
the woman removed her laundry when she collected it.
a week from today
so he sent two of his disciples, telling them, "go into the city, and a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. follow him.
one god and father of all, who is over all and through all and in all.
now the law requires the descendants of levi who become priests to collect a tenth from the people--that is, their brothers--even though their brothers are descended from abraham.
let no one deceive you with empty words, for because of such things god’s wrath comes on those who are disobedient.
thick, as fabric or book pages
"if anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother, his wife and children, his brothers and sisters--yes, even his own life--he cannot be my disciple.
"my name is legion," he replied, "for we are many." and he begged jesus again and again not to send them out of the area.
i just casually helped.
though you do not know him, i know him. if i said i did not, i would be a liar like you, but i do know him and keep his word.
to think over, to think about something
throb, as a headache or stomach pain
since we keep going back and forth to our work, then i am becoming weary.
we are not withholding our affection from you, but you are withholding yours from us.
teach the older men to be temperate, worthy of respect, self-controlled, and sound in faith, in love and in endurance.
the son of amminadab, the son of ram, the son of hezron, the son of perez, the son of judah,
head louse
to touch each other
so they too have now become disobedient in order that they too may now receive mercy as a result of god's mercy to you.
and if any place will not welcome you or listen to you, shake the dust off your feet when you leave, as a testimony against them."
as for the river/stream which has been dammed up, the body of the water is blocked.
if then i do not grasp the meaning of what someone is saying, i am a foreigner to the speaker, and he is a foreigner to me.
the kingdom of heaven is like treasure hidden in a field. when a man found it, he hid it again, and then in his joy went and sold all he had and bought that field.
a person who reads a book, opens it up to read.
jump up and down
clear the doorway so i can pass through.
can any of you prove me guilty of sin? if i am telling the truth, why don't you believe me?
to pursue a wounded animal
pestle with a carved top
so after i have completed this task and have made sure that they have received this fruit, i will go to spain and visit you on the way.
stop drinking only water, and use a little wine because of your stomach and your frequent illnesses.
i hook them onto the basket rim
dialectal variation of gakap
travel up and over a summit
female young of an animal
to eat with fingers, squeezing food into a ball
sing a lullaby
those who are harvesting are being rushed so that [the harvesting] will soon be finished.
bow and arrow set.
christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us, for it is written: “cursed is everyone who is hung on a pole.”
if anyone does not love the lord--a curse be on him. come, o lord !
that which we step on are the steps.
a light for revelation to the gentiles, and the glory of your people israel.”
to pound into powder such as corn or coffee
recount
bright, light of the moon
now the hand of the lord is against you. you are going to be blind for a time, not even able to see the light of the sun.” immediately mist and darkness came over him, and he groped about, seeking someone to lead him by the hand.
behave
dwarf
so in christ we, though many, form one body, and each member belongs to all the others.
to have stamina, strength, or endurance to accomplish something.
elihud the father of eleazar, eleazar the father of matthan, matthan the father of jacob,
sweep away
as for the person who makes an issue about something, someone else will have to speak in order to make a settlement.
facing
core of a boil
jesus replied, "i tell you the truth, everyone who sins is a slave to sin.
and said, “everyone brings out the choice wine first and then the cheaper wine after the guests have had too much to drink; but you have saved the best till now.”
so i made up my mind that i would not make another painful visit to you.
instruction about baptisms, the laying on of hands, the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment.
those who went ahead and those who followed shouted, "hosanna! " "blessed is he who comes in the name of the lord!"
the child said, “uncle, my father is staying in the house
from the sky huge hailstones of about a hundred pounds each fell upon men. and they cursed god on account of the plague of hail, because the plague was so terrible
when martha heard that jesus was coming, she went out to meet him, but mary stayed at home.
we place the stone and bee's wax which is used to charm a person on [her] as an armband on her arm or used as a necklace.
then jesus said to him, “see that you don’t tell anyone. but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the gift moses commanded, as a testimony to them.”
loudly brag.
to carry in both arms, as a child.
men worshiped the dragon because he had given authority to the beast, and they also worshiped the beast and asked, "who is like the beast? who can make war against him?"
“to the angel of the church in philadelphia write: these are the words of him who is holy and true, who holds the key of david. what he opens no one can shut, and what he shuts no one can open.
i, john, your brother and companion in the suffering and kingdom and patient endurance that are ours in jesus, was on the island of patmos because of the word of god and the testimony of jesus.
see that what you have heard from the beginning remains in you. if it does, you also will remain in the son and in the father.
the pharisees heard the crowd whispering such things about him. then the chief priests and the pharisees sent temple guards to arrest him.
tree with rough leaves used like sandpaper
as for poison, whatever is able to poison such as tayuran.
if there is no secondary channel, we recognize when the water is returning to its place because the beach becomes large as it is left behind by the water.
but only a fearful expectation of judgment and of raging fire that will consume the enemies of god.
two were racing to return to the house. one said, “if you happen to be beaten [to the destination], you will be the one to fetch water.”
the soldiers also came up and mocked him. they offered him wine vinegar
this man, however, did not trace his descent from levi, yet he collected a tenth from abraham and blessed him who had the promises.
the lord has done this, and it is marvelous in our eyes' ?"
wisdom
the iguana lives in the secondary forest.
large water heron or bittern
what we sew won’t finished.
which said: “write on a scroll what you see and send it to the seven churches: to ephesus, smyrna, pergamum, thyatira, sardis, philadelphia and laodicea.”
to be operated on
when i took the termite dust and sprinkled it outside, i scattered it on the ground.
tailed creature
to bend something
heavy
while he was speaking, a cloud appeared and covered them, and they were afraid as they entered the cloud.
tidbit of food
even if it is not our relative (lit. companion) if we empathize with the one weeping, we will offer comfort by saying that it is natural that we die.
cut-down cogon grass.
now what do you know about this!
close associate
arrange
to slap
monkey trap
because they could not bear what was commanded: "if even an animal touches the mountain, it must be stoned."
to show mercy to our ancestors and to remember his holy covenant,
dig camotes
it is true that some preach christ out of envy and rivalry, but others out of goodwill. the latter do so in love, knowing that i am put here for the defense of the gospel. the former preach christ out of selfish ambition, not sincerely, supposing that they can stir up trouble for me while i am in chains.
hole, as in the ground or in an object
the leaders are having a group discussion about whether there will be [eventual] reciprocal exhanges for a brideprice.
and he gave orders to stop the chariot. then both philip and the eunuch went down into the water, and philip baptized him.
a crosswise slice, we sever by cutting off with a saw-like motion.
of them the proverbs are true: "a dog returns to its vomit," and, "a sow that is washed goes back to her wallowing in the mud."
you led each other to embrace because you had been reconciled.
so this weak brother or sister, for whom christ died, is destroyed by your knowledge.
strap
harvested but unthreshed rice stored in granary
murderer
now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: "the one i kiss is the man; arrest him and lead him away under guard."
in the same way, any of you who does not give up everything he has cannot be my disciple.
you will say then, "branches were broken off so that i could be grafted in."
decorative ear plug
wood was what she ordered him to get.
i saw that the woman was drunk with the blood of the saints, the blood of those who bore testimony to jesus.
flame
squeeze
we test a person to see if his conduct is good.patogkaran nu.
his head and hair were white like wool, as white as snow, and his eyes were like blazing fire.
edible ferns
return the same night
the people of the city were divided; some sided with the jews, others with the apostles.
swollen jaws due to bad teeth.

by abolishing in his flesh the law with its commandments and regulations. his purpose was to create in himself one new man out of the two, thus making peace,  and in one body to reconcile both of them to god through the cross, by which he put to death their hostility.
meaning.
eat
then, because so many people were coming and going that they did not even have a chance to eat, he said to them, "come with me by yourselves to a quiet place and get some rest."
they devoted themselves to the apostles’ teaching and to fellowship, to the breaking of bread and to prayer.
for this reason, ever since i heard about your faith in the lord jesus and your love for all god’s people,
then the devil took him to the holy city and had him stand on the highest point of the temple.
wave offering using a chicken
cigarette
it would be great if the husband of tuning knew how to make a rice granary, however, he doesn't
i am not writing this to shame you, but to warn you, as my dear children.
uncle made a mortar which was small but the mouth [of the mortar] was spacious and deep.
horns or antlers
and if satan opposes himself and is divided, he cannot stand; his end has come.
a
to the chosen lady and her children, whom i love in the truth--and not i only, but also all who know the truth-- because of the truth, which lives in us and will be with us forever:
when we tiptoe, we step on our toes when we walk.
jesus continued: "there was a man who had two sons.
there are many birds of the forest.
the water has come to a boil already.
fancy knife used for self-defense
padded hips of a monkey
neighbor
let us, therefore, make every effort to enter that rest, so that no one will perish by following their example of disobedience.
the headdress of the of the love bird is red but the extention [of the headdress] there at the back of its neck is green.
lose hope
at the resurrection whose wife will she be, since the seven were married to her?"
set dogs on a trail
shave one’s head
when the dragon saw that he had been hurled to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child.
one day peter and john were going up to the temple at the time of prayer—at three in the afternoon.
(the sadducees say that there is no resurrection, and that there are neither angels nor spirits, but the pharisees believe all these things.)
exclamation of surprise.
after receiving the tabernacle, our ancestors under joshua brought it with them when they took the land from the nations god drove out before them. it remained in the land until the time of david,
wild boar; wild creature
our forefathers ate the manna in the desert; as it is written: 'he gave them bread from heaven to eat.' "
heap of tobacco
soft spot on baby's head (fontanel)
for such men are false apostles, deceitful workmen, masquerading as apostles of christ.
once again jesus went out beside the lake. a large crowd came to him, and he began to teach them.
strain
if i must boast, i will boast of the things that show my weakness.
younger-older relationship
to grab or pull on as clothing in such a manner that it may tear
but if that place is abandoned, it will be quiet; there will be no more people and no talking that we can hear.
and anyone who swears by the temple swears by it and by the one who dwells in it.
if a spring is new, it cannot be stretched because it is very strong. we cannot manage to stretch it.
to those not having the law i became like one not having the law (though i am not free from god’s law but am under christ’s law), so as to win those not having the law.
then jesus was led by the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
i have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."
if we cross a river, if we cannot locate a shallow area because the water is swift, we will be carried away by the current to a deep area.
the  extention(s) of our body are the feet and hand(s) and the head.
bomb; spray
slingshot
all those who lived in lydda and sharon saw him and turned to the lord.
small, double-woven two-piece case or wallet
that which is used as payment for a brideprice
to be missing teeth
“this perfume could have been sold at a high price and the money given to the poor.”
we had just barely sat down when guests arrived and caught us as we were eating.
a person who has no love for his companion ostracizes him.
the chief priests picked up the coins and said, “it is against the law to put this into the treasury, since it is blood money.”
and then twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on his head. they put a staff in his right hand. then they knelt in front of him and mocked him. “hail, king of the jews!” they said.
and have the most important seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at banquets.
dark color
leaning back against jesus, he asked him, "lord, who is it?"
to clear away debris or spider webs from any area using any instrument such as a broom, a rake, a stick or even one’s hands
to be scratched by something rough
but you will receive power when the holy spirit comes on you; and you will be my witnesses in jerusalem, and in all judea and samaria, and to the ends of the earth.”
for he received honor and glory from god the father when the voice came to him from the majestic glory, saying, "this is my son, whom i love; with him i am well pleased." we ourselves heard this voice that came from heaven when we were with him on the sacred mountain.
then the end will come, when he hands over the kingdom to god the father after he has destroyed all dominion, authority and power.
to die the same day as someone has visited one’s village
"now my heart is troubled, and what shall i say? 'father, save me from this hour'? no, it was for this very reason i came to this hour.
inform
jesus replied, "if anyone loves me, he will obey my teaching. my father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him.
since that time he waits for his enemies to be made his footstool,
use it for making the hearth.
to be without recourse
it would be better for them to be thrown into the sea with a millstone tied around their neck than to cause one of these little ones to stumble.
when he had finished praying, jesus left with his disciples and crossed the kidron valley. on the other side there was a garden, and he and his disciples went into it.
being fully persuaded that god had power to do what he had promised.
for we cannot do anything against the truth, but only for the truth.
curse
included
go over there.
on reaching jerusalem, jesus entered the temple area and began driving out those who were buying and selling there. he overturned the tables of the money changers and the benches of those selling doves,
but if it is preached that christ has been raised from the dead, how can some of you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?
the person whose legs are crippled, he scoots as he moves along.
and adam was not the one deceived; it was the woman who was deceived and became a sinner.
their fingernails were sweating.
peter remembered and said to jesus, "rabbi, look! the fig tree you cursed has withered!"
then all the virgins woke up and trimmed their lamps.
are not all angels ministering spirits sent to serve those who will inherit salvation?
only offspring of certain sex; only child
to step,
if you are worried about something, you will be disturbed if somone asks you
birth
if you believe, you will receive whatever you ask for in prayer.”
and saying, “repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.”
if the part of the dough offered as firstfruits is holy, then the whole batch is holy; if the root is holy, so are the branches.
“what is written in the law?” he replied. “how do you read it?”
satan was still thinking about what next he could use to test jesus.
the library was what impeded [the flow of] the flooding river
weep
so the soldiers, carrying out their orders, took paul with them during the night and brought him as far as antipatris.
this service that you perform is not only supplying the needs of god's people but is also overflowing in many expressions of thanks to god.
to be surprised, amazed, horrified
but encourage one another daily, as long as it is called “today,” so that none of you may be hardened by sin’s deceitfulness.
carry out
they will pile the wood on the rack.
soil, mud.
but jesus called the children to him and said, “let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of god belongs to such as these.
let the peace of christ rule in your hearts, since as members of one body you were called to peace. and be thankful.
eat well or eat a lot
consider it pure joy, my brothers and sisters, whenever you face trials of many kinds,
"but they all alike began to make excuses. the first said, 'i have just bought a field, and i must go and see it. please excuse me.'
rapids of a river.
fourth finger or toe.
“i have given them your word and the world has hated them, for they are not of the world any more than i am of the world.”
examine
he replied, "as you enter the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. follow him to the house that he enters,
to correct, chasten
for i know that good itself does not dwell in me, that is, in my sinful nature. for i have the desire to do what is good, but i cannot carry it out.
to the pure, all things are pure, but to those who are corrupted and do not believe, nothing is pure. in fact, both their minds and consciences are corrupted.
be patient, then, brothers, until the lord's coming. see how the farmer waits for the land to yield its valuable crop and how patient he is for the autumn and spring rains.
there was some bamboo on which a dead tree fell which was splintered because the whole clump was cracked.
after removing saul, he made david their king. god testified concerning him: ‘i have found david son of jesse, a man after my own heart; he will do everything i want him to do.’
plain black cloth (used for blouses)
when they heard about the resurrection of the dead, some of them sneered, but others said, "we want to hear you again on this subject."
"at that time men will see the son of man coming in clouds with great power and glory
line up
shoulder blade
all these people were still living by faith when they died. they did not receive the things promised; they only saw them and welcomed them from a distance. and they admitted that they were aliens and strangers on earth.
when there is a wedding feast, and if there are some who are lacking rice (lit. food), we add to the rice for those who had insufficient.
this little chick has sprouted wings.
small honey bee that makes its nest in a hole in a tree
so jesus said, "when you have lifted up the son of man, then you will know that i am the one i claim to be and that i do nothing on my own but speak just what the father has taught me.
dried green tobacco
david himself, speaking by the holy spirit, declared: " 'the lord said to my lord: "sit at my right hand until i put your enemies under your feet." '
one of three original ata siblings who ascended into heaven.
welcome him in the lord with great joy, and honor men like him,
“i have brought you glory on earth by finishing the work you gave me to do.”
i will recover my knife when my corn is sold.
repay
and isaiah boldly says, “i was found by those who did not seek me; i revealed myself to those who did not ask for me.”
marry one’s sibling (incest)
when we go on an errand to the forest and there is no water nearby, we cut a vine and pour its water out and drink it because we are thirsty.
to be fed up
stare at each other
to harvest individual plants such as corn or sugarcane by cutting or breaking off the plants.
finger (of a person)
i must go on boasting. although there is nothing to be gained, i will go on to visions and revelations from the lord.
decrease, as temperature or blood pressure
as they were shouting and throwing off their cloaks and flinging dust into the air,
jesus answered, “i told you that i am he. if you are looking for me, then let these men go.”
thumping/dripping sound
in our place, we don't show respect to someone unless they have been made a leader.
therefore, remember that formerly you who are gentiles by birth and called “uncircumcised” by those who call themselves “the circumcision” (which is done in the body by human hands)—
and let us consider how we may spur one another on toward love and good deeds.
you also must be ready, because the son of man will come at an hour when you do not expect him."
“but so that we may not cause offense, go to the lake and throw out your line. take the first fish you catch; open its mouth and you will find a four-drachma coin. take it and give it to them for my tax and yours.”
type of sword or knife
jesus turned and said to peter, “get behind me, satan! you are a stumbling block to me; you do not have in mind the concerns of god, but merely human concerns.”
no one can serve two masters. either you will hate the one and love the other, or you will be devoted to the one and despise the other. you cannot serve both god and money.
delicious.
from now on, you, my oldest children, won’t have any change of circumstances; i’m handing you over to poverty.
one who has become a priest not on the basis of a regulation as to his ancestry but on the basis of the power of an indestructible life.
he got up, rebuked the wind and said to the waves, "quiet! be still!" then the wind died down and it was completely calm.
they tie up heavy, cumbersome loads and put them on other people’s shoulders, but they themselves are not willing to lift a finger to move them.
a finger ring.
don’t i have the right to do what i want with my own money? or are you envious because i am generous?’
so from now on we regard no one from a worldly point of view. though we once regarded christ in this way, we do so no longer.
he answered, "anyone who divorces his wife and marries another woman commits adultery against her.
no, new wine must be poured into new wineskins.
the rattan fruit is astringent when we chew it.
kind of large forest tree with large leaves.
for if someone comes to you and preaches a jesus other than the jesus we preached, or if you receive a different spirit from the one you received, or a different gospel from the one you accepted, you put up with it easily enough.
call one’s dog from a distance
therefore keep watch, because you do not know the day or the hour.
if he did not spare the ancient world when he brought the flood on its ungodly people, but protected noah, a preacher of righteousness, and seven others;
“now when david had served god’s purpose in his own generation, he fell asleep; he was buried with his ancestors and his body decayed.
communicate with spirits
you, however, are not in the realm of the flesh but are in the realm of the spirit, if indeed the spirit of god lives in you. and if anyone does not have the spirit of christ, they do not belong to christ.
for by him all things were created: things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities; all things were created by him and for him.
stop
anyone
which is easier: to say, ‘your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘get up and walk’?
that by which something is attached to another object, such as a rope or piece of rattan.
large shell used as a horn to call people or scare raiders
i was tired of waiting for you; i [arrived] earlier
again jesus called the crowd to him and said, "listen to me, everyone, and understand this.
something taking a long time
then the sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to him with a question.
if someone visits [our house], we ask them, “so what is your purpose [in visiting]?
but when the jewish festival of tabernacles was near,
he ran away with the girl.
to mate with or have sexual relations with someone.
doctora said, “how many weeks will you be at your home place?” usì said, “even so that's ok because i will return soon.”
the edge of the river which is flat in which reeds grow, that is soft soil ground.
do not lie to each other, since you have taken off your old self with its practices
for scripture says, “do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain,” and “the worker deserves his wages.”
but when you give a banquet, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind,
for if we have been united with him in a death like his, we will certainly also be united with him in a resurrection like his.
and said, "if you are the king of the jews, save yourself."
jesus replied, "the people of this age marry and are given in marriage.
slow, long-lasting, durable
the name of a village on the kapalong river
after jesus had finished instructing his twelve disciples, he went on from there to teach and preach in the towns of galilee.
on my account you will be brought before governors and kings as witnesses to them and to the gentiles.
when paul came in, the jews who had come down from jerusalem stood around him. they brought many serious charges against him, but they could not prove them.
and, “in the very place where it was said to them, ‘you are not my people,’ there they will be called ‘children of the living god.’”
but i know that even now god will give you whatever you ask."
when the believers learned of this, they took him down to caesarea and sent him off to tarsus.
roundworms.
pointed or having tapering sides, such as a mountain peak or pencil tip
squeeze out between two hard surfaces, as sugarcane juice or lice nits from hair
to become thin
anyone who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces; anyone on whom it falls will be crushed.”
wilderness
bite off
seek out
by faith he made his home in the promised land like a stranger in a foreign country; he lived in tents, as did isaac and jacob, who were heirs with him of the same promise.
the holy spirit was showing by this that the way into the most holy place had not yet been disclosed as long as the first tabernacle was still standing.
according to his eternal purpose that he accomplished in christ jesus our lord.
to him who overcomes and does my will to the end, i will give authority over the nations-- 'he will rule them with an iron scepter; he will dash them to pieces like pottery' - -just as i have received authority from my father. i will also give him the morning star.
bloated stomach
bear with each other and forgive whatever grievances you may have against one another. forgive as the lord forgave you.
for kings and all those in authority, that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness.
the people were waiting expectantly and were all wondering in their hearts if john might possibly be the messiah.
when jim took our picture and when it was finished, he gave us our picture.
tall
temporary or interim leader
phase of the moon
dear friends, since god so loved us, we also ought to love one another.
there are many grubs which are squirming.
he took peter, james and john along with him, and he began to be deeply distressed and troubled.
we are attracted by the pretty design.
and cursed the god of heaven because of their pains and their sores, but they refused to repent of their deeds.
we give something to our companions who have nothing to eat.
for he himself is our peace, who has made the two groups one and has destroyed the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility,
male partner other than husband
esus did many other things as well. if every one of them were written down, i suppose that even the whole world would not have room for the books that would be written.
when a dog sits, all of his feet touch (are propped on??) the ground
granted. but they were broken off because of unbelief, and you stand by faith. do not be arrogant, but be afraid.
for i tell you that christ has become a servant of the jews on behalf of god’s truth, so that the promises made to the patriarchs might be confirmed.
again they tried to seize him, but he escaped their grasp.
scratch, as in dirt like a chicken
break
the manager said to himself, ‘what shall i do now? my master is taking away my job. i’m not strong enough to dig, and i’m ashamed to beg—
block off with a fish trap
when the daughter of herodias came in and danced, she pleased herod and his dinner guests.
a certain ruler asked him, “good teacher, what must i do to inherit eternal life?”
and he took the children in his arms, put his hands on them and blessed them.
saying: “we give thanks to you, lord god almighty, the one who is and who was, because you have taken your great power and have begun to reign.
give something as a token of appreciation
"a voice of one calling in the desert, 'prepare the way for the lord, make straight paths for him.' "
if we see someone to whom we are related whom we have not yet met, we feel confident toward him.
if there is a person who has a fault/sin whom we are arresting, we say, “don't resist because you have no recourse because you are surrounded.”
you finally purchased the axe because its price was reduced.
the mother may roll on the child.
to visit someone in their home
when he has become skilled, he will likewise use [that skill] to teach another person.
to cook corn, fish, etc., in a bamboo tube
for what i received i passed on to you as of first importance: that christ died for our sins according to the scriptures,
and when she finds it, she calls her friends and neighbors together and says, 'rejoice with me; i have found my lost coin.'
everyone must submit himself to the governing authorities, for there is no authority except that which god has established. the authorities that exist have been established by god.
to plant
those on the rocky ground are the ones who receive the word with joy when they hear it, but they have no root. they believe for a while, but in the time of testing they fall away.
do to others as you would have them do to you.
i will just be seven days downriver.
when the body(s) of the grub(s) are moving, they also wriggle.
carried away
heron
when we plant corn, we get a snall basket in which to put the rice and we strap it here at [our] waist.
sudsuron ta ka mundù.
now, lord, consider their threats and enable your servants to speak your word with great boldness.
if there is a person who actually was the one who did wrong, and then he accused someone else because he was causing his theft to be attributed [to someone else].
authority
they spoke about his departure, which he was about to bring to fulfillment at jerusalem.
we were surprised at amutatoy.
to search for a pig
to initiate a conversation or discussion
a bird or animal used as a decoy
then they hurled insults at him and said, "you are this fellow's disciple! we are disciples of moses!
the alag nut is astringent when we chew it. it is used to stop bleeding if someone has been cut.
in preparation for a guest
whenever he goes downriver, he does not stop en route until he returns home coming from patil.
of any plant with many shoots, very strong, prolific, healthy; strong current of water.
there was also a prophet, anna, the daughter of penuel, of the tribe of asher. she was very old; she had lived with her husband seven years after her marriage,  and then was a widow until she was eighty-four. she never left the temple but worshiped night and day, fasting and praying.
as for the woman, she gathered together her [clean] laundry, collected and took it away ; she removed it and carred it to the house.
it is because of him that you are in christ jesus, who has become for us wisdom from god--that is, our righteousness, holiness and redemption.
he died for us so that, whether we are awake or asleep, we may live together with him.
the losok snake has a mottled pattern to its body.
and they were all amazed at the greatness of god
and if christ has not been raised, your faith is futile; you are still in your sins.
he said to them, "why are you troubled, and why do doubts rise in your minds?
therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the father and of the son and of the holy spirit,
stain; transfer color
this man lived in the tombs, and no one could bind him any more, not even with a chain. for he had often been chained hand and foot, but he tore the chains apart and broke the irons on his feet. no one was strong enough to subdue him.
if it is round but has become smaller, it has shrunk.
about that time there arose a great disturbance about the way.
anyone who does not listen to him will be completely cut off from their people.’
something with holes; leaking item
swift
to be kept secret from someone
dawn
shredded abaca fiber (hemp)
broom
garden
when we are gathered together there, because we are looking at each other in front of us, we keep smiling at one another.
“remember what i told you: ‘a servant is not greater than his master.’ if they persecuted me, they will persecute you also. if they obeyed my teaching, they will obey yours also.”
understand, then, that those who have faith are children of abraham.
to be sighted, as with a gun or binoculars.
a person who cuts individual strands of baluy or lunrun grass, uses it to make a pouch in which to put seed rice.
“you have heard that it was said, ‘you shall not commit adultery.’
“you may ask me for anything in my name, and i will do it.”
touch
that all of them may be one, father, just as you are in me and i am in you. may they also be in us so that the world may believe that you have sent me.
to go up
if the limestone rock is pounded into a powder it can be used as lime.
leech, about an inch long
everyone who believes that jesus is the christ is born of god, and everyone who loves the father loves his child as well.
as for you, the anointing you received from him remains in you, and you do not need anyone to teach you. but as his anointing teaches you about all things and as that anointing is real, not counterfeit--just as it has taught you, remain in him.
why should any of you consider it incredible that god raises the dead?
flat land
i do not say this to condemn you; i have said before that you have such a place in our hearts that we would live or die with you.
and the teachers of the law who came down from jerusalem said, "he is possessed by beelzebub ! by the prince of demons he is driving out demons."
while the pharisees were gathered together, jesus asked them,
give a friendship gift when visiting
and no wonder, for satan himself masquerades as an angel of light.
third
that which we use to treat [crops] are plants, banga palm, fan palm, plants of the field, vines which are the treatments of plants.
follow around
whoever can be trusted with very little can also be trusted with much, and whoever is dishonest with very little will also be dishonest with much.
a house, if it only has glass windows, they are transparent because we can see through to the other side because our view is unobstructed.
we’ll get slashed.
they all asked, "are you then the son of god?" he replied, "you are right in saying i am."
but thanks be to god that, though you used to be slaves to sin, you have come to obey from your heart the pattern of teaching that has now claimed your allegiance.
for a long time
if one is intercepted, you are blocked when you pass by way of the raiders.
the corn will be skinny. the ears will be small.
to have something thrown at oneself, as when playing dodge ball
severe infection under the skin in fingers or toes
the membrane encases the white of the egg. and the white of the egg surrounds the yoke.
as for a child, he hurries to keep up with his father as he is walking beside him.
hand of bananas.
make it your ambition to lead a quiet life, to mind your own business and to work with your hands, just as we told you,
to decompose (wood becoming soft and crumbly)
some of the pharisees in the crowd said to jesus, "teacher, rebuke your disciples!"
the name of the star is wormwood. a third of the waters turned bitter, and many people died from the waters that had become bitter.
but we have this treasure in jars of clay to show that this all-surpassing power is from god and not from us.
we are just temporary residents here on the earth.
he exerted when he raised christ from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly realms,
the lovers are moving close to each other.
then jesus' mother and brothers arrived. standing outside, they sent someone in to call him.
kind of manika leaf chewed with betelnut
whatever happens, conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of christ. then, whether i come and see you or only hear about you in my absence, i will know that you stand firm in one spirit, contending as one man for the faith of the gospel
the assembly was in confusion: some were shouting one thing, some another. most of the people did not even know why they were there.
as for camote plants, when we plant them, the roots follow the stem (lit. body).
the grace of our lord jesus christ be with you all.
“all i have is yours, and all you have is mine. and glory has come to me through them.”
as for a ladder, it has two leaning posts which have pieces that are laid horizontally, and those are the steps.
and god is able to make all grace abound to you, so that in all things at all times, having all that you need, you will abound in every good work.
what goes into someone’s mouth does not defile them, but what comes out of their mouth, that is what defiles them.”
but someone may ask, "how are the dead raised? with what kind of body will they come?"
pattern your behaviour after his.
jump
then jesus asked them, "which is lawful on the sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill?" but they remained silent.
who have been chosen according to the foreknowledge of god the father, through the sanctifying work of the spirit, to be obedient to jesus christ and sprinkled with his blood: grace and peace be yours in abundance.
the chief priests and the teachers of the law were standing there, vehemently accusing him.
there is a judge for the one who rejects me and does not accept my words; that very word which i spoke will condemn him at the last day.
“if you really know me, you will know my father as well. from now on, you do know him and have seen him.”
the sand by the ocean glistens.
to glue or stick something onto something else
swim deeply underwater
then i heard the number of those who were sealed: 144,000 from all the tribes of israel.
they will turn their ears away from the truth and turn aside to myths.
guitar pick.
intentionally break off
express agreement; empathize
let's build a beautiful house.
yet the news about him spread all the more, so that crowds of people came to hear him and to be healed of their sicknesses.
first of all, you must understand that in the last days scoffers will come, scoffing and following their own evil desires.
the person who is persistent and strong to work, that is an industrious person.
whoever loves his brother lives in the light, and there is nothing in him to make him stumble.
grace to you and peace from god our father and the lord jesus christ.
familiar spirit.
be wise in the way you act toward outsiders; make the most of every opportunity.
every year jesus’ parents went to jerusalem for the festival of the passover.
then he took the cup, gave thanks and offered it to them, and they all drank from it.
now
he has brought down rulers from their thrones but has lifted up the humble.
termite
his acquaintance subtracted three hundred pesos. the money which arrived,  was only two hundred [pesos].
blisters
forearm
dulian fruit when it is ripe breaks off at the stem where it attaches to the fruit.
moreover, we have all had human fathers who disciplined us and we respected them for it. how much more should we submit to the father of our spirits and live!
his mercy extends to those who fear him, from generation to generation.
he repeatedly takes away the wives of other people.
climb down.
so the last will be first, and the first will be last.”
belly
"but in those days, following that distress, " 'the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light;
jesus looked at them and said, “with man this is impossible, but with god all things are possible.”
small, ruffly, light brown edible fungus
to form a cocoon (moths, butterflies, larva)
so that you may eat the flesh of kings, generals, and the mighty, of horses and their riders, and the flesh of all people, free and slave, great and small.”
briefly or superficially
you’re going to suffer a change of circumstances tomorrow when your companions aren’t here.
then there came flashes of lightning, rumblings, peals of thunder and a severe earthquake. no earthquake like it has ever occurred since man has been on earth, so tremendous was the quake.
borrow someone's land
a tall person is tall.
likely
of either a man or woman to be sexually oriented toward the opposite sex doing work, activities and sometimes using clothing of the opposite sex.
those two were in agreement with each other
have someone curl one’s hair
flood
to pull back and inside, as head of a turtle.
and he asked them, “whose image is this? and whose inscription?”
but one of his disciples, judas iscariot, who was later to betray him, objected,
if two children have fought with each other, [their relationship] won't develop because they are now fighting.
the gaze of the older monkey was behind him because they were watching their young offspring.
cut off
if there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even christ has been raised.
sift the flour.
and drank the same spiritual drink; for they drank from the spiritual rock that accompanied them, and that rock was christ.
as for a vertical jump, we [jump] upwards.
“men of galilee,” they said, “why do you stand here looking into the sky? this same jesus, who has been taken from you into heaven, will come back in the same way you have seen him go into heaven.”
speak or act inappropriately and/or disrespectfully.
therefore god gave them over in the sinful desires of their hearts to sexual impurity for the degrading of their bodies with one another.
her neighbors and relatives heard that the lord had shown her great mercy, and they shared her joy.
to echo, as a sound.
"who is he, sir?" the man asked. "tell me so that i may believe in him."
tender (as beans)
so she came running to simon peter and the other disciple, the one jesus loved, and said, “they have taken the lord out of the tomb, and we don’t know where they have put him!”
thus you nullify the word of god by your tradition that you have handed down. and you do many things like that."
all they asked was that we should continue to remember the poor, the very thing i had been eager to do all along.
pain
but as for you, continue in what you have learned and have become convinced of, because you know those from whom you learned it,
when we rode a jeep from valencia, at baguntaas it was halfway to nasuli. that is, it was in the middle of the ride.
for we are god’s handiwork, created in christ jesus to do good works, which god prepared in advance for us to do.
accomplish, finish
shiny
when this had happened, the rest of the sick on the island came and were cured.
spear with detachable barbed head held in place with a rope
the death he died, he died to sin once for all; but the life he lives, he lives to god.
therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the father and of the son and of the holy spirit,
he said to them, "do you bring in a lamp to put it under a bowl or a bed? instead, don't you put it on its stand?
snatch quickly
be rotted from rain, as rope, cloth, or bamboo fence
just then a man came up to jesus and asked, “teacher, what good thing must i do to get eternal life?”
to have someone hear what we have to say
the person who is taken by surprise that his eyebrow hurts has a sinus-type headache.
old ladder.
on one occasion, while he was eating with them, he gave them this command: “do not leave jerusalem, but wait for the gift my father promised, which you have heard me speak about.
who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the master has put in charge of the servants in his household to give them their food at the proper time?
height, length
and placed it in his own new tomb that he had cut out of the rock. he rolled a big stone in front of the entrance to the tomb and went away.
rare type of metal bracelet made by the older people which has indentations as decoration
the entire law is summed up in a single command: "love your neighbor as yourself."
we let them know superficially.
fat of an animal or human.
it is not to angels that he has subjected the world to come, about which we are speaking.
be devoted to one another in love. honor one another above yourselves.
for if the willingness is there, the gift is acceptable according to what one has, not according to what one does not have.
then some soldiers asked him, “and what should we do?” he replied, “don’t extort money and don’t accuse people falsely—be content with your pay.”
undone
because joseph her husband was faithful to the law, and yet did not want to expose her to public disgrace, he had in mind to divorce her quietly.
we will build a fire and put those [red pepper] fruits in the fire and then we will hurriedly get out because we will inadvertently breathe in the stinging [smoke] and we will be afflicted by a cough in which we will frequently go into coughing spasms when we cough.
container
“i’m going out to fish,” simon peter told them, and they said, “we’ll go with you.” so they went out and got into the boat, but that night they caught nothing.
firm
"you will all fall away," jesus told them, "for it is written: " 'i will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.'
when the river floods, it rains for one night and then the entire riverbed is underwater.
as soon as
"then the lord said to me, 'go; i will send you far away to the gentiles.' "
kidnap
why is my language not clear to you? because you are unable to hear what i say.
then levi held a great banquet for jesus at his house, and a large crowd of tax collectors and others were eating with them.
“as you know, the passover is two days away—and the son of man will be handed over to be crucified.”
honeycomb
the words “it was credited to him” were written not for him alone,
and when the chief shepherd appears, you will receive the crown of glory that will never fade away. toward one another, because, "god opposes the proud but gives grace to the humble."
but since we belong to the day, let us be sober, putting on faith and love as a breastplate, and the hope of salvation as a helmet.
ask for something; request; beg
shake drying grain to the center of a mat
someone in the crowd said to him, "teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me."
a female spirit with long hair which lives in the water
swim overhand.
as it is written: “for your sake we face death all day long; we are considered as sheep to be slaughtered.”
a tree that is being felled makes a loud cracking sound as it falls over.
but since it involves questions about words and names and your own law—settle the matter yourselves. i will not be a judge of such things.”
a person who climbs a tree always moves upwards.
but store up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where moths and vermin do not destroy, and where thieves do not break in and steal.
command those who are rich in this present world not to be arrogant nor to put their hope in wealth, which is so uncertain, but to put their hope in god, who richly provides us with everything for our enjoyment.
"father, the time has come. glorify your son, that your son may glorify you. for you granted him authority over all people that he might give eter
the next day as they were leaving bethany, jesus was hungry.
scaffolding of a house.
starchy tuber with heart-shaped leaves, requires soaking to remove poison
to break one’s jaw
not yet.
he did not fail to confess, but confessed freely, “i am not the messiah.”
the chicken was thrown to the ground.
the disciples came to him and asked, “why do you speak to the people in parables?”
fight the good fight of the faith. take hold of the eternal life to which you were called when you made your good confession in the presence of many witnesses.
his mother said, "come here because i will listen to your stomach to find out why your stomach is growling."
infected teeth from not brushing
since everything will be destroyed in this way, what kind of people ought you to be? you ought to live holy and godly lives
pinworm
if i had not come and spoken to them, they would not be guilty of sin. now, however, they have no excuse for their sin.
“he cuts off every branch in me that bears no fruit, while every branch that does bear fruit he prunes so that it will be even more fruitful.”
crocodile
just as paul was about to speak, gallio said to them, “if you jews were making a complaint about some misdemeanor or serious crime, it would be reasonable for me to listen to you.
please forgive [that person].
walk upriver
"so then, king agrippa, i was not disobedient to the vision from heaven.
strip off
do not repay anyone evil for evil. be careful to do what is right in the eyes of everybody.
a red wild chicken which has a loud crow is called batug.
but suppose that servant is wicked and says to himself, ‘my master is staying away a long time,’
to extinguish
keeping a close watch on him, they sent spies, who pretended to be honest. they hoped to catch jesus in something he said so that they might hand him over to the power and authority of the governor.
for everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and he who humbles himself will be exalted."
as he was scattering the seed, some fell along the path, and the birds came and ate it up.
the child who is wiggley can’t sit still
to fulfill what was said through the prophet isaiah:
“i am telling you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe that i am who i am.”
slingshot made of abaca fiber
log, uprooted stump which does not have any more leaves left, just its body.
i will set out and go back to my father and say to him: father, i have sinned against heaven and against you.
fellow israelites, i can tell you confidently that the patriarch david died and was buried, and his tomb is here to this day.   but he was a prophet and knew that god had promised him on oath that he would place one of his descendants on his throne.  seeing what was to come, he spoke of the resurrection of the messiah, that he was not abandoned to the realm of the dead, nor did his body see decay.
start eating (because food is ready)
and do not forget to do good and to share with others, for with such sacrifices god is pleased.
“why wasn’t this perfume sold and the money given to the poor? it was worth a year’s wages.”
even though we speak like this, dear friends, we are confident of better things in your case--things that accompany salvation.
then jesus said to the centurion, “go! let it be done just as you believed it would.” and his servant was healed at that very hour.
a second angel followed and said, “fallen! fallen is babylon the great, which made all the nations drink the maddening wine of her adulteries.”
sleep deprived
bite off [the tails] of the shrimps.
during the days of jesus’ life on earth, he offered up prayers and petitions with fervent cries and tears to the one who could save him from death, and he was heard because of his reverent submission.
now some teachers of the law were sitting there, thinking to themselves,
steward
but the centurion, instead of listening to what paul said, followed the advice of the pilot and of the owner of the ship.
very much
now peter was sitting out in the courtyard, and a servant girl came to him. “you also were with jesus of galilee,” she said.
kind of hard bamboo
when the rattan became chewed, that is [the meaning of the word] ogkatobtob.
again the jews picked up stones to stone him,
“we tell you the good news: what god promised our ancestors
and called out in a loud voice, “jesus, master, have pity on us!”
hide a fault
the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them were the names of the twelve apostles of the lamb.
for rulers hold no terror for those who do right, but for those who do wrong. do you want to be free from fear of the one in authority? then do what is right and you will be commended.
i’ll yank your head back after a while.
plane
become bent, as an arrow
noisy
who enjoyed god’s favor and asked that he might provide a dwelling place for the god of jacob.
sloping
then he left the crowd and went into the house. his disciples came to him and said, “explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field.”
anything
then they will go away to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life.”
do not conform to the pattern of this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind. then you will be able to test and approve what god’s will is—his good, pleasing and perfect will.
sometimes we sneeze if we happen to smell something fragrant.
be merciful, just as your father is merciful.
but we ought always to thank god for you, brothers and sisters loved by the lord, because god chose you as firstfruits to be saved through the sanctifying work of the spirit and through belief in the truth.
excessive
regarding if we had a friend with whom we had a good relationship but if [someone sings] his song but he is no longer on earth, you will be caused to think about him when you hear that song [which he used to sing] when he was still alive.
small flute
to cook corn, fish, etc., in a bamboo tube
you, my brothers, were called to be free. but do not use your freedom to indulge the sinful nature ; rather, serve one another in love.
for he says to moses, “i will have mercy on whom i have mercy, and i will have compassion on whom i have compassion.”
she is absorbed in her praying so that her good thoughts will continue.
plant with white flowers that glow at night
wind that [blows] in a circle.
as so
to launder by pounding to remove dirt
"take away the stone," he said. "but, lord," said martha, the sister of the dead man, "by this time there is a bad odor, for he has been there four days."
a small, narrow chicken laying basket.
fulfill
drawstring
if we chew well the [plant ]that is known to treat snake bite, when it has been masticated, we spit it on the [spot that] was bitten.
like she is single, so i’m single
what, after all, is apollos? and what is paul? only servants, through whom you came to believe—as the lord has assigned to each his task.
jesus answered, “it is said: ‘do not put the lord your god to the test.’”
feel hurt or angry
the queen of the south will rise at the judgment with the men of this generation and condemn them; for she came from the ends of the earth to listen to solomon's wisdom, and now one greater than solomon is here.
so herodias nursed a grudge against john and wanted to kill him. but she was not able to,
but when you give a banquet, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind,
we boarded a ship from adramyttium about to sail for ports along the coast of the province of asia, and we put out to sea. aristarchus, a macedonian from thessalonica, was with us.
continue a conversation the next day.
jesus said to them, “bring some of the fish you have just caught.”
to love, care about (someone)
the number of the mounted troops was two hundred million. i heard their number.
greedy
the men of nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it; for they repented at the preaching of jonah, and now something greater than jonah is here.
whether, then, it was i or they, this is what we preach, and this is what you believed.
they followed him because he had amazed them for a long time with his sorcery.
wear wooden ear plugs
blowfly
name of an evil spirit dwelling on the outer side of house walls.
and this water symbolizes baptism that now saves you also--not the removal of dirt from the body but the pledge of a good conscience toward god. it saves you by the resurrection of jesus christ,
the seventh angel poured out his bowl into the air, and out of the temple came a loud voice from the throne, saying, "it is done!"
when the disciples james and john saw this, they asked, "lord, do you want 1531 us to call fire down from heaven to destroy them ?"
bold and arrogant, these men are not afraid to slander celestial beings; yet even angels, although they are stronger and more powerful, do not bring slanderous accusations against such beings in the presence of the lord.
today
abraham replied, ‘they have moses and the prophets; let them listen to them.’
the red rat was changed from a red flying squirrel.
i do not want to seem to be trying to frighten you with my letters.
scrub floor with coconut husk
for which i am suffering even to the point of being chained like a criminal. but god’s word is not chained.
the god of this age has blinded the minds of unbelievers, so that they cannot see the light of the gospel that displays the glory of christ, who is the image of god.
if you suffer, it should not be as a murderer or thief or any other kind of criminal, or even as a meddler.
it hurts if the hair gets pulled.
give us each day our daily bread.
alveolar click
you too, be patient and stand firm, because the lord's coming is near.
neither do people light a lamp and put it under a bowl. instead they put it on its stand, and it gives light to everyone in the house.
inside or hold of a boat or dugout canoe
and they had nothing to say
a place to rest.
obtain viand
now about virgins: i have no command from the lord, but i give a judgment as one who by the lord’s mercy is trustworthy.
kind of rattan fruit
joanna the wife of chuza, the manager of herod’s household; susanna; and many others. these women were helping to support them out of their own means.
and we also thank god continually because, when you received the word of god, which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men, but as it actually is, the word of god, which is at work in you who believe.
brothers and sisters, my heart’s desire and prayer to god for the israelites is that they may be saved.
always changing locations, restless
shoreline.
when he had said this, he showed them his hands and feet.
my bottom has become flattened
no one who is born of god will continue to sin, because god's seed remains in him; he cannot go on sinning, because he has been born of god.
our companionship has been cut off because we live far from each other.
the man who eats everything must not look down on him who does not, and the man who does not eat everything must not condemn the man who does, for god has accepted him.
for many to throw something at one another.
he was holding a little scroll, which lay open in his hand. he planted his right foot on the sea and his left foot on the land,
rude, unmannerly, vulgar girl.
the crowd that followed kept shouting, "away with him!"
to cry out, scream.
as for ash, it comes from a fire if there is something that is burned.
material for baby swing or cradle
i sent tychicus to ephesus.
tiny-grained red rice.
therefore, holy brothers, who share in the heavenly calling, fix your thoughts on jesus, the apostle and high priest whom we confess.
anyone who does wrong will be repaid for his wrong, and there is no favoritism.
egg
one of those listening was a woman from the city of thyatira named lydia, a dealer in purple cloth. she was a worshiper of god. the lord opened her heart to respond to paul’s message.
cut off
but the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
love is patient, love is kind. it does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud.
steep place with overhanging vines.
use up all of something
if it is a house which needs to be made higher, it will be jacked up slowly because it is necessary to insert props under the house posts.
then he said to his disciples, “the time is coming when you will long to see one of the days of the son of man, but you will not see it.
immediately the leprosy left him and he was cured.
may the lord make your love increase and overflow for each other and for everyone else, just as ours does for you.
failure
then i saw another angel flying in midair, and he had the eternal gospel to proclaim to those who live on the earth—to every nation, tribe, language and people.
they are wild waves of the sea, foaming up their shame; wandering stars, for whom blackest darkness has been reserved forever.
still, many in the crowd put their faith in him. they said, "when the christ comes, will he do more miraculous signs than this man?"
trigger
we have come to share in christ, if indeed we hold firmly to the end the confidence we had at first.
grab
bring people together
therefore do not be foolish, but understand what the lord’s will is.
similarly, encourage the young men to be self-controlled.
they replied, “some say john the baptist; others say elijah; and still others, jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
slanderers, god-haters, insolent, arrogant and boastful; they invent ways of doing evil; they disobey their parents;
and when the centurion, who stood there in front of jesus, heard his cry and saw how he died, he said, "surely this man was the son of god!"
watch and pray so that you will not fall into temptation. the spirit is willing, but the body is weak."
his acquaintance subtracted three hundred pesos. the money which arrived,  was only two hundred [pesos].
if he is not able, he will send a delegation while the other is still a long way off and will ask for terms of peace.
be ticklish
pilate said, "take him yourselves and judge him by your own law."
does god give you his spirit and work miracles among you because you observe the law, or because you believe what you heard?
he went in and said to them, "why all this commotion and wailing? the child is not dead but asleep."
result
because you are his sons, god sent the spirit of his son into our hearts, the spirit who calls out, “abba, father.”
as it is, you boast and brag. all such boasting is evil.
you be the ones [to talk] now.
swim on one’s back
if we have a companion who has conduct which cannot be changed, we give up on teaching him to do good.
poor
unhusked rice
even from your own number men will arise and distort the truth in order to draw away disciples after them.
to strike
orderly
still another said, "i will follow you, lord; but first let me go back and say good-by to my family."
jesus, knowing all that was going to happen to him, went out and asked them, “who is it you want?”
when it is becoming dawn, the wind is cold and we feel cold.
do not entertain an accusation against an elder unless it is brought by two or three witnesses.
do not be hasty in the laying on of hands, and do not share in the sins of others. keep yourself pure.
fear or panic attributed to an evil spirit
we will warm ourselves by a fire if we are chilled.
my uncle said, "let's be alert because this is his trick."
disagreement
i looked, and there before me was a white horse! its rider held a bow, and he was given a crown, and he rode out as a conqueror bent on conquest.
to kneel.
jesus said to his disciples: “things that cause people to stumble are bound to come, but woe to anyone through whom they come.
“now they know that everything you have given me comes from you.”
finally the opportune time came. on his birthday herod gave a banquet for his high officials and military commanders and the leading men of galilee.
“now when david had served god’s purpose in his own generation, he fell asleep; he was buried with his ancestors and his body decayed.
so he called ten of his servants and gave them ten minas. 'put this money to work,' he said, 'until i come back.'
overtaken by darkness
as for people long ago, they weren't able to play because they would be quick to demand retribution and then would ask for a large settlement.
arrive at a destination
the how that has caught fire, it's necessary
crossroads.
then the angel showed me the river of the water of life, as clear as crystal, flowing from the throne of god and of the lamb
and called out, “stand up on your feet!” at that, the man jumped up and began to walk.
“yes it is, lord,” she said. “even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their master’s table.”
for john came to you to show you the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes did. and even after you saw this, you did not repent and believe him.
then some of the pharisees and teachers of the law said to him, “teacher, we want to see a sign from you.”
and jesus was in the temple area walking in solomon's colonnade.
he keeps coming back until he is able to obtain that for which he was asking.
slice it crosswise.
now then, at the resurrection whose wife will she be, since the seven were married to her?"
white-ant hill
you know the commandments: 'do not murder, do not commit adultery, do not steal, do not give false testimony, do not defraud, honor your father and mother.' "
but many who are first will be last, and the last first."
when the ubun-ubun dove calls it says, "bagu-bù, huun, huun, huun."
one day peter and john were going up to the temple at the time of prayer—at three in the afternoon.
in all this you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while you may have had to suffer grief in all kinds of trials.
favored child who is not required to work
to swear or vow
you, however, are not in the realm of the flesh but are in the realm of the spirit, if indeed the spirit of god lives in you. and if anyone does not have the spirit of christ, they do not belong to christ.
if for example we are doing something but if there is something worrying us, the thing we would have done at the beginning is supplanted  and then we are distracted to something else so that we didn't accomplish [what we started out to do].
change clothes
that is why we labor and strive, because we have put our hope in the living god, who is the savior of all people, and especially of those who believe.
us
he went in and said to them, "why all this commotion and wailing? the child is not dead but asleep."
and the chief priests and the teachers of the law were looking for some way to get rid of jesus, for they were afraid of the people.
the [water] of the liboganon river doesn’t rise unless it floods. the [water] of the ocean rises but it still remains clear.
and this is my prayer: that your love may abound more and more in knowledge and depth of insight,
kind of manika leaf chewed with betelnut
meanwhile, all the people were wailing and mourning for her. “stop wailing,” jesus said. “she is not dead but asleep.”
if someone orders [someone else] to kill [somebody], he will carry out
now is the time for judgment on this world; now the prince of this world will be driven out.
"but when the tenants saw him, they talked the matter over. 'this is the heir,' they said. 'let's kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.'
he said to the crowd: "when you see a cloud rising in the west, immediately you say, 'it's going to rain,' and it does.
after much discussion, peter got up and addressed them: “brothers, you know that some time ago god made a choice among you that the gentiles might hear from my lips the message of the gospel and believe.
in this self-confident boasting i am not talking as the lord would, but as a fool.
“if you belonged to the world, it would love you as its own. as it is, you do not belong to the world, but i have chosen you out of the world. that is why the world hates you.”
there is no fear in love. but perfect love drives out fear, because fear has to do with punishment. the one who fears is not made perfect in love.
requesting
when the wind is strong, it's intensity will decrease
night, darkness
to be afraid
let both grow together until the harvest. at that time i will tell the harvesters: first collect the weeds and tie them in bundles to be burned; then gather the wheat and bring it into my barn.’”
then i was told, “you must prophesy again about many peoples, nations, languages and kings.”
blossom
the brightness of a glow is faint.
he ran away with the girl.
i needed an embroidered blouse.
turn on one's side, edge
no one would ??? to go ahead...all the people would be included.
tear off
after the discussion, the wedding is begun. that is the decision that they get married.
he will show you a large upper room, all furnished. make preparations there."
going to pilate, he asked for jesus’ body, and pilate ordered that it be given to him.
to bridle horse.
taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke the loaves. then he gave them to his disciples to set before the people. he also divided the two fish among them all.
let us, then, go to him outside the camp, bearing the disgrace he bore.
with that, one of jesus’ companions reached for his sword, drew it out and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
as for the teacher who was returning home to maniki, she was taken part way by the children as far as patil.
daughter-in-law
there are also heavenly bodies and there are earthly bodies; but the splendor of the heavenly bodies is one kind, and the splendor of the earthly bodies is another.
the library was what blocked the water.
if we have a companion who has conduct which cannot be changed, we give up on teaching him to do good.
therefore, i will punish him and then release him."
feel hurt or angry
“bring them here to me,” he said.
two men, moses and elijah, appeared in glorious splendor, talking with jesus.
but whoever blasphemes against the holy spirit will never be forgiven; he is guilty of an eternal sin."
for you have spent enough time in the past doing what pagans choose to do-- living in debauchery, lust, drunkenness, orgies, carousing and detestable idolatry.
fan oneself due to heat
“do not be amazed at this, for a time is coming when all who are in their graves will hear his voice
that kind of persuasion does not come from the one who calls you.
constantly
coconut
box or sock
fly (insect)
what
chest or breastbone of meat, brisket.
she will scold [all] of her companions since they won't obey [her].
when they came to the other disciples, they saw a large crowd around them and the teachers of the law arguing with them.
(this was the first census that took place while quirinius was governor of syria.)
when we strike a flint stone, sparks fly out.
jesus, once more deeply moved, came to the tomb. it was a cave with a stone laid across the entrance.
the  extention(s) of our body are the feet and hand(s) and the head.
to be a minister of christ jesus to the gentiles with the priestly duty of proclaiming the gospel of god, so that the gentiles might become an offering acceptable to god, sanctified by the holy spirit.
choke
we’ll break the floor.
he said to them, “go!” so they came out and went into the pigs, and the whole herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and died in the water.
it didn’t produce for us.
slant-eyed; lovely.
as it is written: “see, i lay in zion a stone that causes people to stumble and a rock that makes them fall, and the one who believes in him will never be put to shame.”
the rest of mankind that were not killed by these plagues still did not repent of the work of their hands; they did not stop worshiping demons, and idols of gold, silver, bronze, stone and wood--idols that cannot see or hear or walk.
straighten, as one's back
or
for one's brow to relax.
the spirit you received does not make you slaves, so that you live in fear again; rather, the spirit you received brought about your adoption to sonship. and by him we cry, “abba, father.”
he replied, "isaiah was right when he prophesied about you hypocrites; as it is written: " 'these people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me.
female; woman; unmarried woman
one begins to make a basket. whatever kind of woven basket, that is the initial stage of weaving a basket.
embroider.
feathery hair of bamboo
the woman who is having difficulty as she gives birth, her stomach will be opened up so the child can be caused to be taken out.
when jesus saw this, he was indignant. he said to them, "let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of god belongs to such as these.
when he came to jerusalem, he tried to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he really was a disciple.
a person who cannot endure weeding his rice field will quickly become frustrated and will stop working before finishing.
“men of galilee,” they said, “why do you stand here looking into the sky? this same jesus, who has been taken from you into heaven, will come back in the same way you have seen him go into heaven.”
therefore, brothers and sisters, we are not children of the slave woman, but of the free woman.
for those god foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his son, that he might be the firstborn among many brothers and sisters.
hezekiah the father of manasseh, manasseh the father of amon, amon the father of josiah,
and will give our attention to prayer and the ministry of the word.”
the time came when the beggar died and the angels carried him to abraham’s side. the rich man also died and was buried.
to swear (by someone)
to light, as a lamp or fire; ignite
the person who was cooking, he/she took a potholder which which to remove the lid of the pot because it was hot.
and said, “get up, take the child and his mother and go to the land of israel, for those who were trying to take the child’s life are dead.”
for it is written in the law of moses: “do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.” is it about oxen that god is concerned?
lugtom has the older-younger sibling relationship with gibangon.
the water came into the boat.
but timothy has just now come to us from you and has brought good news about your faith and love. he has told us that you always have pleasant memories of us and that you long to see us, just as we also long to see you.
to stagger as one who is drunk and keeps losing his balance and falling or almost falling over.
when jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic, "son, your sins are forgiven."
the holes of the marmot’s mound is connected underneath to the places where they make their nests
to be sure, sin was in the world before the law was given, but sin is not charged against anyone’s account where there is no law.
and for this purpose i was appointed a herald and an apostle--i am telling the truth, i am not lying--and a teacher of the true faith to the gentiles
i have been crucified with christ and i no longer live, but christ lives in me. the life i live in the body, i live by faith in the son of god, who loved me and gave himself for me.
what shall we do now?
people were also bringing babies to jesus for him to place his hands on them. when the disciples saw this, they rebuked them.
but with good deeds, appropriate for women who profess to worship god.
these returned and reported it to the rest; but they did not believe them either.
dear friend, do not imitate what is evil but what is good. anyone who does what is good is from god. anyone who does what is evil has not seen god.
the promises were spoken to abraham and to his seed. scripture does not say “and to seeds,” meaning many people, but “and to your seed,” meaning one person, who is christ.
if we get a thorn in our foot, we will pick it out with a needle so that the thorn will be removed.
but we know where this man is from; when the christ comes, no one will know where he is from."
to manage or lift something
then the governor’s soldiers took jesus into the praetorium and gathered the whole company of soldiers around him.
when they had gone, an angel of the lord appeared to joseph in a dream. “get up,” he said, “take the child and his mother and escape to egypt. stay there until i tell you, for herod is going to search for the child to kill him.”
and this was his message: "after me will come one more powerful than i, the thongs of whose sandals i am not worthy to stoop down and untie.
to pry off, up, out
jesus stopped and said, "call him." so they called to the blind man, "cheer up! on your feet! he's calling you."
provoked
a person who is ill and can no longer be aroused is going into a coma.
tell riddles at a wake
then someone came and said, “look! the men you put in jail are standing in the temple courts teaching the people.”
as for a pig which is pregnant, her stomach alternately bulges as the unborn piglets move about.
feed her the rice.
but they shouted, “take him away! take him away! crucify him!” “shall i crucify your king?” pilate asked. “we have no king but caesar,” the chief priests answered.
through him everyone who believes is set free from every sin, a justification you were not able to obtain under the law of moses.
winnowing tray
and when he found him, he brought him to antioch. so for a whole year barnabas and saul met with the church and taught great numbers of people. the disciples were called christians first at antioch.
we cause [people] to hear what we have to say.
the child’s father and mother marveled at what was said about him.
so you also must be ready, because the son of man will come at an hour when you do not expect him.
to get a thorn (in flesh)
the chief priests and the whole sanhedrin were looking for evidence against jesus so that they could put him to death, but they did not find any.
as for the person who easily becomes frustrated, his thoughts are short and he quickly becomes agitated and angry.
woe to you, teachers of the law and pharisees, you hypocrites! you clean the outside of the cup and dish, but inside they are full of greed and self-indulgence.
so they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.
"no one ever spoke the way this man does," the guards declared.
and if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? do not even pagans do that?
finally, my brothers, rejoice in the lord! it is no trouble for me to write the same things to you again, and it is a safeguard for you.
the person said, “about the debt of the kapugi people, it was a long time ago.”
one person will stay with our things
deceptive, tricky
will not
become sooty
sunset
at this they covered their ears and, yelling at the top of their voices, they all rushed at him,
“no one lights a lamp and hides it in a clay jar or puts it under a bed. instead, they put it on a stand, so that those who come in can see the light.
squirrel
and whoever welcomes one such child in my name welcomes me.
stand up
stubby tail or ears of a dog.
we’ll get slashed.
male, man, boy
now when jesus saw the crowds, he went up on a mountainside and sat down. his disciples came to him,
place or put
thread
to be seemingly unconcerned
on the contrary, when he was in rome, he searched hard for me until he found me.
to widen, press apart
continually scratch as a dog with mange
playful
in the morning, there was no small commotion among the soldiers as to what had become of peter.
poisonous vine which is used both for poisoning fish and for committing suicide.
to be forced into a bad situation
and come out—those who have done what is good will rise to live, and those who have done what is evil will rise to be condemned.
to fondle a baby
camote field
equip you with everything good for doing his will, and may he work in us what is pleasing to him, through jesus christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. amen.
if he didn't catch it, he didn't [successfully] go after and catch it.
stilts.
all domesticated animals have hips but chickens don't because their legs are attached to their sides.
dogs run away with meat.
"the servant came back and reported this to his master. then the owner of the house became angry and ordered his servant, 'go out quickly into the streets and alleys of the town and bring in the poor, the crippled, the blind and the lame.'
to hold on the lap
but i have prayed for you, simon, that your faith may not fail. and when you have turned back, strengthen your brothers."
struggle to free oneself
igì is venting her frustration because there is no one to watch her children, so she cannot go dig camotes.
trembling and bewildered, the women went out and fled from the tomb. they said nothing to anyone, because they were afraid.
slim, having a narrow waist
a dog ran away with it.
blind boil
woodpecker
the creatures of the water like mud fish and the po-it fish, they have scales
then jesus, still teaching in the temple courts, cried out, "yes, you know me, and you know where i am from. i am not here on my own, but he who sent me is true. you do not know him,
he was faithful to the one who appointed him, just as moses was faithful in all god’s house.
i know your deeds. see, i have placed before you an open door that no one can shut. i know that you have little strength, yet you have kept my word and have not denied my name.
to experience cold
then jesus told them this parable:
he warned them not to tell others about him.
as it is written: “i have made you a father of many nations.” he is our father in the sight of god, in whom he believed—the god who gives life to the dead and calls into being things that were not.
jesus left the temple and was walking away when his disciples came up to him to call his attention to its buildings.
after him, judas the galilean appeared in the days of the census and led a band of people in revolt. he too was killed, and all his followers were scattered.
rather, he must be hospitable, one who loves what is good, who is self-controlled, upright, holy and disciplined.
faint
saying, 'this fellow began to build and was not able to finish.'
they will use speech that hits the mark. it will establish the truth of the matter. the person cannot answer back.
appease
if she will no longer give-birth, she will stop bearing.
when they were in the house again, the disciples asked jesus about this.
leak through.
for my flesh is real food and my blood is real drink.
i want to know christ—yes, to know the power of his resurrection and participation in his sufferings, becoming like him in his death,
"who has ever given to god, that god should repay him?"
logging industry
beautiful; to have a good attitude toward someone.
to kill someone to prevent him from arriving home safely
i, me (oblique pronoun)
by faith in the name of jesus, this man whom you see and know was made strong. it is jesus’ name and the faith that comes through him that has completely healed him, as you can all see.
the man who saw it has given testimony, and his testimony is true. he knows that he tells the truth, and he testifies so that you also may believe.
news of this reached the church in jerusalem, and they sent barnabas to antioch.
it is written in isaiah the prophet: "i will send my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way"
he who was seated on the throne said, “i am making everything new!” then he said, “write this down, for these words are trustworthy and true.”
finally, brothers, we instructed you how to live in order to please god, as in fact you are living. now we ask you and urge you in the lord jesus to do this more and more.
they were startled and frightened, thinking they saw a ghost.
ruin and misery mark their ways,
but all those who knew him, including the women who had followed him from galilee, stood at a distance, watching these things.
bump
a white bead
unhelpful
upper arm or neck of a musical instrument like a guitar or kuglung.
youngest child in a family
people will be lovers of themselves, lovers of money, boastful, proud, abusive, disobedient to their parents, ungrateful, unholy,
the woman came and knelt before him. “lord, help me!” she said.
we’ll take [the raft] across here
play tag
pretend
now you are the body of christ, and each one of you is a part of it.
this is why i write these things when i am absent, that when i come i may not have to be harsh in my use of authority—the authority the lord gave me for building you up, not for tearing you down.
female of animal, bird, or other creature
all this is for your benefit, so that the grace that is reaching more and more people may cause thanksgiving to overflow to the glory of god.
john said to the crowds coming out to be baptized by him, “you brood of vipers! who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
left
now the first covenant had regulations for worship and also an earthly sanctuary.
the words of the prophets are in agreement with this, as it is written:
before this faith came, we were held prisoners by the law, locked up until faith should be revealed.
in addition to our own encouragement, we were especially delighted to see how happy titus was, because his spirit has been refreshed by all of you. i had boasted to him about you, and you have not embarrassed me. but just as everything we said to you was true, so our boasting about you to titus has proved to be true as well.
then he rolled up the scroll, gave it back to the attendant and sat down. the eyes of everyone in the synagogue were fastened on him.
now about food sacrificed to idols: we know that we all possess knowledge. knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
then he said to them, "whoever welcomes this little child in my name welcomes me; and whoever welcomes me welcomes the one who sent me. for he who is least among you all--he is the greatest."
outside are the dogs, those who practice magic arts, the sexually immoral, the murderers, the idolaters and everyone who loves and practices falsehood.
as they were coming down the mountain, jesus gave them orders not to tell anyone what they had seen until the son of man had risen from the dead.
for i am not ashamed of the gospel, because it is the power of god that brings salvation to everyone who believes: first to the jew, then to the gentile.
“lord, have mercy on my son,” he said. “he has seizures and is suffering greatly. he often falls into the fire or into the water.
jesus went throughout galilee, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and healing every disease and sickness among the people.
roll something
by the grace god has given me, i laid a foundation as an expert builder, and someone else is building on it. but each one should be careful how he builds.
dirty
then his disciples said to each other, “could someone have brought him food?”
but other jews were jealous; so they rounded up some bad characters from the marketplace, formed a mob and started a riot in the city. they rushed to jason’s house in search of paul and silas in order to bring them out to the crowd.
don't continually be staying out late at night at some other house where there are young unmarried ladies.
when this had dawned on him, he went to the house of mary the mother of john, also called mark, where many people had gathered and were praying.
eat anything raw
therefore do not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey its evil desires.
be hidden from sight, as in a flood
if that is how god clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, will he not much more clothe you—you of little faith?
i dried [the fish] near the fire so it wouldn’t get wormy.
an idol
contrary to a fact.
kind of tobacco
praying mantis
from there we put out to sea again and passed to the lee of cyprus because the winds were against us.
therefore i glory in christ jesus in my service to god.
add onto
he/she will quit eating.
comfort
he released the man who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and murder, the one they asked for, and surrendered jesus to their will.
to mate (animals)
resentful
what did they cook
the wife of my daughter (lit. female offspring) is the one who has become my son-in-law.
“and for your sake i am glad i was not there, so that you may believe. but let us go to him.”
stubby-tailed animal
canoe.
he will not quarrel or cry out; no one will hear his voice in the streets.
kind of red rice
pound rice with someone
i have no one else like him, who takes a genuine interest in your welfare.
as for the kapigsula plant, it sprouts on the beach and is used to treat double-skin and a white skin fungus.
to poison fish with the fruit of the lagtang vine
moistened lime
if we are teaching a child, he is quick to understand.
i am thankful that i did not baptize any of you except crispus and gaius,
leaving the crowd behind, they took him along, just as he was, in the boat. there were also other boats with him.
something with holes; leaking item
for this is the reason the gospel was preached even to those who are now dead, so that they might be judged according to human standards in regard to the body, but live according to god in regard to the spirit.
then peter, filled with the holy spirit, said to them: “rulers and elders of the people!
the son of man will go just as it is written about him. but woe to that man who betrays the son of man! it would be better for him if he had not been born."
it was revealed to them that they were not serving themselves but you, when they spoke of the things that have now been told you by those who have preached the gospel to you by the holy spirit sent from heaven. even angels long to look into these things.
all inhabitants of the earth will worship the beast—all whose names have not been written in the lamb’s book of life, the lamb who was slain from the creation of the world.
as he was going into a village, ten men who had leprosy met him. they stood at a distance
the [piece of] wood which is a lever, that is the thing used for leverage is put underneath
the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are ceremonially unclean sanctify them so that they are outwardly clean.
tickle
all the law and the prophets hang on these two commandments.”
he opened his mouth to blaspheme god, and to slander his name and his dwelling place and those who live in heaven.
to express meaning
gruel, something cooked until mushy (e.g., rice porridge)
when we strike a flint stone, sparks fly out.
naughty
when she recognized peter’s voice, she was so overjoyed she ran back without opening it and exclaimed, “peter is at the door!”
the horses are racing each other.
it’s just a bit of fat that he has.
for you know the grace of our lord jesus christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sake he became poor, so that you through his poverty might become rich.
you call your father “amò”.
two men will be in the field; one will be taken and the other left.
i won’t sleep even with you
he must manage his own family well and see that his children obey him, and he must do so in a manner worthy of full respect.
be curled up in the womb
our chickens all flocked around here earlier.
to become dirty or contaminated
cut vines
to make polite request.
as he looked up, jesus saw the rich putting their gifts into the temple treasury.
for, as i have often told you before and now say again even with tears, many live as enemies of the cross of christ.
to the church of god in corinth, to those sanctified in christ jesus and called to be his holy people, together with all those everywhere who call on the name of our lord jesus christ—their lord and ours:
to be closed (as a flower), or not yet open
i'll be expecting your return on that third day.
cliff
dear friend, i pray that you may enjoy good health and that all may go well with you, even as your soul is getting along well.
as for one person, he or she waits in readiness to spear that hoop which will be rolling.
to the elders among you, i appeal as a fellow elder, a witness of christ's sufferings and one who also will share in the glory to be revealed:
he commanded his sister, “come here.”
get soaked
once more jesus said to them, "i am going away, and you will look for me, and you will die in your sin. where i go, you cannot come."
he did it to demonstrate his righteousness at the present time, so as to be just and the one who justifies those who have faith in jesus.
mountain; hill
if satan drives out satan, he is divided against himself. how then can his kingdom stand?
but if she does, she must remain unmarried or else be reconciled to her husband. and a husband must not divorce his wife.
press down; compress; tightly compress; push in; depress
blunt
we ought always to thank god for you, brothers and sisters, and rightly so, because your faith is growing more and more, and the love all of you have for one another is increasing.
burrow made by a person or animal
wear a wrap-around skirt high enough to cover breasts
sparkle, glisten
lazy
thanks be to god, who put into the heart of titus the same concern i have for you.
thick
then john’s disciples came and asked him, “how is it that we and the pharisees fast often, but your disciples do not fast?”
several bathing
the kalayag spirit will punish.
and without faith it is impossible to please god, because anyone who comes to him must believe that he exists and that he rewards those who earnestly seek him.
it was about this time that king herod arrested some who belonged to the church, intending to persecute them.
but when they did not find them, they dragged jason and some other believers before the city officials, shouting: “these men who have caused trouble all over the world have now come here,
he also forced everyone, small and great, rich and poor, free and slave, to receive a mark on his right hand or on his forehead,
dissuade from doing something
heaven must receive him until the time comes for god to restore everything, as he promised long ago through his holy prophets.
a certain man from cyrene, simon, the father of alexander and rufus, was passing by on his way in from the country, and they forced him to carry the cross.
“two men went up to the temple to pray, one a pharisee and the other a tax collector.
and the people all tried to touch him, because power was coming from him and healing them all.
a room within a house or building
inflate
not to weed in center of a field
then they secretly persuaded some men to say, “we have heard stephen speak blasphemous words against moses and against god.”
behind the ear
when the head of a turtle retracts inside its shell, it moves backwards and goes inside its shell.
presence of evil spirits at death feast
the person who uses a light to fish for frogs spears them with a multiple-pronged spear.
you who are trying to be justified by the law have been alienated from christ; you have fallen away from grace.
anyone who does not listen to him will be completely cut off from their people.’
but you, keep your head in all situations, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelist, discharge all the duties of your ministry.
long edible grub (larva of black and red beetle)
after further threats they let them go. they could not decide how to punish them, because all the people were praising god for what had happened.
to intentionally dismantle or take something apart
erase
when the river floods, it rains for one night and then the entire riverbed is underwater.
when i was on the beach, i was caught by the wind of a strong whirlwind.
overtake
when he inquired as to the time when his son got better, they said to him, “yesterday, at one in the afternoon, the fever left him.”
before
remove a thorn by scraping or pressing
so too, a levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the other side.
forty
but the people of israel, who pursued the law as the way of righteousness, have not attained their goal.
become flavorless
have chills from malaria or dengue fever
if we happen to meet someone on the trail and [if] we are shy, he elbowed us.
candy.
why not? because they pursued it not by faith but as if it were by works. they stumbled over the stumbling stone.
dogs run away with meat.
turn over onto one's side; lay on one's side
pour the blood in a basin lest it leak out
we (topic, dual personal)
as it is written: "he has scattered abroad his gifts to the poor; his righteousness endures forever."
kind of mold
people were overwhelmed with amazement. "he has done everything well," they said. "he even makes the deaf hear and the mute speak."
so neither the one who plants nor the one who waters is anything, but only god, who makes things grow.
brush flies away from one's face
we’ll be burned by the steam.
to be diligent
lead by a rope
as soon as the sound of your greeting reached my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy.
even though father agree to it; i won’t.
but while everyone was sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat, and went away.
for herod himself had given orders to have john arrested, and he had him bound and put in prison. he did this because of herodias, his brother philip's wife, whom he had married.
kind of bird
break
“woe to you, chorazin! woe to you, bethsaida! for if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in tyre and sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
drawn-up limb, as in a crippled leg or hand
peter followed him out of the prison, but he had no idea that what the angel was doing was really happening; he thought he was seeing a vision.
a kind of hardwood tree with small leaves which are used to bathe a baby.
slightly unripe
part of
jesus spoke to them again in parables, saying:
to get sore thighs from walking
tell riddles at a wake
their destiny is destruction, their god is their stomach, and their glory is in their shame. their mind is on earthly things.
be envious
soon afterward, jesus went to a town called nain, and his disciples and a large crowd went along with him.
love song to a girl
but no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth could open the scroll or even look inside it.
and if you greet only your own people, what are you doing more than others? do not even pagans do that?
therefore, if your whole body is full of light, and no part of it dark, it will be completely lighted, as when the light of a lamp shines on you."
to sing to an accompaniment
molar tooth
respond to an invitation
when he had said this, he showed them his hands and feet.
yet because this widow keeps bothering me, i will see that she gets justice, so that she won’t eventually come and attack me!’”
the woman fled into the wilderness to a place prepared for her by god, where she might be taken care of for 1,260 days.
if he ignores this, he himself will be ignored.
after he had said this, he went on to tell them, “our friend lazarus has fallen asleep; but i am going there to wake him up.”
to another miraculous powers, to another prophecy, to another distinguishing between spirits, to another speaking in different kinds of tongues, and to still another the interpretation of tongues.
and in the morning, ‘today it will be stormy, for the sky is red and overcast.’ you know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but you cannot interpret the signs of the times.
white breasted dove with red head.
now then, why do you try to test god by putting on the necks of gentiles a yoke that neither we nor our ancestors have been able to bear?
blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be satisfied. blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
“how will this be,” mary asked the angel, “since i am a virgin?”
don’t you remember that when i was with you i used to tell you these things?
“because the patriarchs were jealous of joseph, they sold him as a slave into egypt. but god was with him
if someone slaps you on one cheek, turn to them the other also. if someone takes your coat, do not withhold your shirt from them.
to break (glass, water pole, cooking pot)
but the cowardly, the unbelieving, the vile, the murderers, the sexually immoral, those who practice magic arts, the idolaters and all liars--their place will be in the fiery lake of burning sulfur. this is the second death."
a kind of tree, the fruit of which monkeys eat.
that propagate, it will become many and spread there in our place.
“it is written,” he said to them, “‘my house will be called a house of prayer,’ but you are making it ‘a den of robbers.’”
release a horse into pasture to choose what it will eat
for this people's heart has become calloused; they hardly hear with their ears, and they have closed their eyes. otherwise they might see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their hearts and turn, and i would heal them.'
but he did not consummate their marriage until she gave birth to a son. and he gave him the name jesus.
i’ve come in response to what you said, “you [come on] monday.”
greet rufus, chosen in the lord, and his mother, who has been a mother to me, too.
a hundred
green tobacco (salingsing)
as for a person who walks on the floor, his stepping forcefully makes a creaking noise.
i hope, therefore, to send him as soon as i see how things go with me.
the jews gathered around him, saying, "how long will you keep us in suspense? if you are the christ, tell us plainly."
split lip
they were delighted and agreed to give him money.
now the lord is the spirit, and where the spirit of the lord is, there is freedom.
the name of a village on the kapalong river
how many
enough
be run over by a vehicle
but i see another law at work in me, waging war against the law of my mind and making me a prisoner of the law of sin at work within me.
"be careful, or your hearts will be weighed down with dissipation, drunkenness and the anxieties of life, and that day will close on you unexpectedly like a trap.
tree with small edible fruits
the house which was not finished in the making, it wasn't completed.
i am the living bread that came down from heaven. if anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. this bread is my flesh, which i will give for the life of the world."
when jesus reached the spot, he looked up and said to him, "zacchaeus, come down immediately. i must stay at your house today."
we
he answered, ‘then i beg you, father, send lazarus to my family,
“after forty years had passed, an angel appeared to moses in the flames of a burning bush in the desert near mount sinai.
and goes home. then he calls his friends and neighbors together and says, 'rejoice with me; i have found my lost sheep.'
the people stood watching, and the rulers even sneered at him. they said, "he saved others; let him save himself if he is the christ of god, the chosen one."
it was he who gave some to be apostles, some to be prophets, some to be evangelists, and some to be pastors and teachers,
for jesus had commanded the impure spirit to come out of the man. many times it had seized him, and though he was chained hand and foot and kept under guard, he had broken his chains and had been driven by the demon into solitary places.
to throw away.
swamp
“just as the father knows me and i know the father—and i lay down my life for the sheep.”
and jesus and his disciples had also been invited to the wedding.
james, a servant of god and of the lord jesus christ, to the twelve tribes scattered among the nations: greetings.
i was unconscious  for a half hour before i came to.
be careful not to practice your righteousness in front of others to be seen by them. if you do, you will have no reward from your father in heaven.
wherever the middle of the earth is, that is the center.
spear
hypocrites! you know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky. how is it that you don't know how to interpret this present time?
small, flying insects that are especially prevalent in rainy weather and warm around outside the houses.
but they were childless because elizabeth was not able to conceive, and they were both very old.
they honored us in many ways; and when we were ready to sail, they furnished us with the supplies we needed.
before the famine reached them, boybayan went after wild camotes.
the gums of a person, that is where the teeth are attached (lit. sprout).
strike
suppose a man comes into your meeting wearing a gold ring and fine clothes, and a poor man in shabby clothes also comes in.
what causes fights and quarrels among you? don't they come from your desires that battle within you?
when a chicken is a mother, it goes ahead of its chicks when it scratches as it looks for something to have her offspring eat.
as soon as jesus was baptized, he went up out of the water. at that moment heaven was opened, and he saw the spirit of god descending like a dove and alighting on him.
to chew betel nut; a larger variety of cultivated betel nut; betel nut container.
for he has been mindful of the humble state of his servant. from now on all generations will call me blessed,
no lie was found in their mouths; they are blameless.
the run or walk of a lizard.
therefore, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?”
the raft may capsize.
but as i told you, you have seen me and still you do not believe.
as for a stringy camoty,  it isn't seen until it is cookedl
we have become white-headed from grey hairs.
if we have a leader who is traveling, there are six bodyguards.
such teachings come through hypocritical liars, whose consciences have been seared as with a hot iron.
blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted.
ear of corn
we are not able to understand
they exchanged the truth about god for a lie, and worshiped and served created things rather than the creator—who is forever praised. amen.
to cut a field, especially with a bolo
so then, each of us will give an account of himself to god.
your were deceived by that which you.trusted.
hearing that jesus had silenced the sadducees, the pharisees got together.
some fell on rocky places, where it did not have much soil. it sprang up quickly, because the soil was shallow.
this is said to a new guest who is shy to take very much food: "eat up!"
mangolian spot
no one serving as a soldier gets involved in civilian affairs--he wants to please his commanding officer.
scales,
prompted by her mother, she said, “give me here on a platter the head of john the baptist.”
the lord’s message rang out from you not only in macedonia and achaia—your faith in god has become known everywhere. therefore we do not need to say anything about it,
see to it that no one misses the grace of god and that no bitter root grows up to cause trouble and defile many.
cuckoo bird
type of shellfish found in fresh water
to shout
the world was not worthy of them. they wandered in deserts and mountains, and in caves and holes in the ground.
i would have liked to keep him with me so that he could take your place in helping me while i am in chains for the gospel.
when the hour came, jesus and his apostles reclined at the table.
to harvest individual plants such as corn or sugarcane by cutting or breaking off the plants.
the [mouth of the container] is made to be narrow and has sharp points so that when water-creatures go inside, they cannot drop out.
if it is an adult who cries to go along, he will pressure the person into letting him come.
then the angel said to me, "the waters you saw, where the prostitute sits, are peoples, multitudes, nations and languages.
you will look for me, but you will not find me; and where i am, you cannot come."
and the lord said, “listen to what the unjust judge says.
for macedonia and achaia were pleased to make a contribution for the poor among the saints in jerusalem.
tangled
since, then, you have been raised with christ, set your hearts on things above, where christ is seated at the right hand of god.
devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful and thankful.
knead, as bread
so do not throw away your confidence; it will be richly rewarded.
when i fuel [a fire] with wood and the fire becomes hot, it flames.
they marched across the breadth of the earth and surrounded the camp of god's people, the city he loves. but fire came down from heaven and devoured them.
his feet were like bronze glowing in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of rushing waters.
are you so foolish? after beginning by means of the spirit, are you now trying to finish by means of the flesh?
resentful
for something to move its head up and down (insect)
there was some extra money left over.
not in passionate lust like the pagans, who do not know god;
deer.
after they had mocked him, they took off the robe and put his own clothes on him. then they led him away to crucify him.
so the man gave them his attention, expecting to get something from them.
kerosene
as for the frog eggs, they have not yet hatched. and there close by will be the mother.
break open
but thanks be to god that, though you used to be slaves to sin, you have come to obey from your heart the pattern of teaching that has now claimed your allegiance.
the only suffering which you can be ignored is that which takes one by surprise because it seems there is a difference between that which is ignored and that which is endured
in the past god spoke to our ancestors through the prophets at many times and in various ways,
roam from house to house looking for food
and so, somehow, to attain to the resurrection from the dead.
when you send me on an errand, kunsay will be the one to carry it out.
go outside
now you, if you call yourself a jew; if you rely on the law and boast in god;
material for baby swing or cradle
to close eyelids, especially in lullabies
brother-in-law of a man
brideprice
small nut from a type of rattan which is chewed with betelnut.
we’ll use buanbuan for the payment.
skin rash
tender (as beans)
a kind of black, short, small-grained rice.
cloth
"then the master told his servant, 'go out to the roads and country lanes and make them come in, so that my house will be full.
when they had gone, an angel of the lord appeared to joseph in a dream. “get up,” he said, “take the child and his mother and escape to egypt. stay there until i tell you, for herod is going to search for the child to kill him.”
the meaning of the sun going down is that it goes over the horizon. it goes out of sight.
follow my example, as i follow the example of christ.
as for a guitar, it has six strings but a kuglung instrument only has two.
be embarrassed
female pig
for they refreshed my spirit and yours also. such men deserve recognition.
then john gave this testimony: “i saw the spirit come down from heaven as a dove and remain on him.
be that as it may, i have not been a burden to you. yet, crafty fellow that i am, i caught you by trickery!
for in christ jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision has any value. the only thing that counts is faith expressing itself through love
it drips through the pot.
weevil variety in rice, corn, flour
jesus christ is the same yesterday and today and forever.
then jesus entered a house, and again a crowd gathered, so that he and his disciples were not even able to eat.
but when the kindness and love of god our savior appeared,
a kind of crayfish having large claws
he who has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says to the churches. to him who overcomes, i will give the right to eat from the tree of life, which is in the paradise of god.
there is a child whose teeth are far apart. his teeth have open spaces between them.
place near coals until partially roasted and dry as method of preservation.
kitchen.
i am not commanding you, but i want to test the sincerity of your love by comparing it with the earnestness of others.
therefore it is necessary to choose one of the men who have been with us the whole time the lord jesus was living among us,  beginning from john’s baptism to the time when jesus was taken up from us. for one of these must become a witness with us of his resurrection.”
cut me off a piece of cucumber
for this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife,
“we are witnesses of everything he did in the country of the jews and in jerusalem. they killed him by hanging him on a cross,
after he had left the crowd and entered the house, his disciples asked him about this parable.
and he will send his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of the heavens to the other.
muscle
in order that in the coming ages he might show the incomparable riches of his grace, expressed in his kindness to us in christ jesus.
they are like children sitting in the marketplace and calling out to each other: ‘we played the pipe for you, and you did not dance; we sang a dirge, and you did not cry.’
"caesar's," they replied. he said to them, "then give to caesar what is caesar's, and to god what is god's."
reserve or engage
upon receiving such orders, he put them in the inner cell and fastened their feet in the stocks.
in the temple courts he found people selling cattle, sheep and doves, and others sitting at tables exchanging money.
i speak the truth in christ—i am not lying, my conscience confirms it through the holy spirit—  i have great sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart.
far away
and the people went out to see what had happened. when they came to jesus, they found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting at jesus’ feet, dressed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
do not rebuke an older man harshly, but exhort him as if he were your father. treat younger men as brothers,
ravel, pull out, or unstring
then he went down to capernaum, a town in galilee, and on the sabbath he taught the people.
to pant (dogs)
his work will be shown for what it is, because the day will bring it to light. it will be revealed with fire, and the fire will test the quality of each man's work.
to wrap up and bind together, as meat.
if there is someone who collects payment for a horse but it has been sold on credit, the one who has received the horse can use anything for payment.
“you don’t know what you are asking,” jesus said to them. “can you drink the cup i am going to drink?” “we can,” they answered.
and there appeared before them elijah and moses, who were talking with jesus.
if a pregnant pig is rammed into by another pig, it will miscarry and that with which it was pregnant will be discharged.
when they heard this, they had no further objections and praised god, saying, “so then, even to gentiles god has granted repentance that leads to life.”
after he put them all out, he took the child's father and mother and the disciples who were with him, and went in where the child was. he took her by the hand and said to her, "talitha koum!" (which means, "little girl, i say to you, get up!" ).
to be able to handle
i am telling you what i have seen in the father's presence, and you do what you have heard from your father. "
all wrongdoing is sin, and there is sin that does not lead to death.
it is better not to eat meat or drink wine or to do anything else that will cause your brother to fall.
he is conceited and understands nothing. he has an unhealthy interest in controversies and quarrels about words that result in envy, strife, malicious talk, evil suspicions
taboo
therefore, brothers and sisters, in all our distress and persecution we were encouraged about you because of your faith.
material used for making mats.
if we love our companions and they also care about us, that is what it means to have a good relationship.
cornerpost of the house.
and, as another scripture says, "they will look on the one they have pierced."
cracking sound
tobacco.
gallbladder
prop
so it is with you. since you are eager to have spiritual gifts, try to excel in gifts that build up the church.
much
i’m asking for water because i am thirsty.
chicken’s tailbone.
strong, such as a bow, a spring which cannot be stretched, or the trigger of a pig trap which springs with great force
but i will show you whom you should fear: fear him who, after the killing of the body, has power to throw you into hell. yes, i tell you, fear him.
lazy
roll over
“lord, they have killed your prophets and torn down your altars; i am the only one left, and they are trying to kill me”?
"teacher," they said, "moses wrote for us that if a man's brother dies and leaves a wife but no children, the man must marry the widow and have children for his brother.
catch up
to ram into something deliberately
wind the beads around your neck
larynx
let's build a beautiful house.
i cannot bear this illness of mine because it has [lasted] a long time.
what do you prefer? shall i come to you with a whip, or in love and with a gentle spirit?
sharpened slivers of bamboo
brother will betray brother to death, and a father his child; children will rebel against their parents and have them put to death.
but i have not used any of these rights. and i am not writing this in the hope that you will do such things for me, for i would rather die than allow anyone to deprive me of this boast.
to watch over, take care of, protect
they crucified two robbers with him, one on his right and one on his left.
as for a  person, [he] teaches good conduct to his offspring.
wear your shoes.
“if you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? even sinners love those who love them.
soft soil.
"have faith in god," jesus answered.
bees sting
the children are being taught so that they will have skills.
a village on the liboganon river between dupitan and bulisung.
(he did not know what to say, they were so frightened.)
above his head they placed the written charge against him: this is jesus, the king of the jews.
and of this gospel i was appointed a herald and an apostle and a teacher.
lullaby
search
be wiped out
pull up as weeds; pluck out feathers or hairs
lime
cut off
don't play so much outside because you will happen to be in the path of evil spirit(s) which are en route to check out a dead person.
young roach
the beginning of the gospel about jesus christ, the son of god.
vehicle
immediately he spoke to them and said, "take courage! it is i. don't be afraid." then he climbed into the boat with them, and the wind died down. they were completely amazed,
the next day the great crowd that had come for the festival heard that jesus was on his way to jerusalem.
after that, he appeared to more than five hundred of the brothers and sisters at the same time, most of whom are still living, though some have fallen asleep.
it was cold, and the servants and officials stood around a fire they had made to keep warm. peter also was standing with them, warming himself.
suffer
he will show you a large upper room, all furnished. make preparations there."
"then he said: 'the god of our fathers has chosen you to know his will and to see the righteous one and to hear words from his mouth.
a rattan seive is the plug of a lime container. it is made of rattan and is a seive for the lime.
now it is required that those who have been given a trust must prove faithful.
as god's fellow workers we urge you not to receive god's grace in vain.
small melon
a kind of wood.
after he had said this, jesus was troubled in spirit and testified, "i tell you the truth, one of you is going to betray me."
you were’nt recognized because your mouth was swollen.
then he said to him, “rise and go; your faith has made you well.”
share with god's people who are in need. practice hospitality.
the whole assembly became silent as they listened to barnabas and paul telling about the signs and wonders god had done among the gentiles through them.
john’s baptism—where did it come from? was it from heaven, or of human origin?” they discussed it among themselves and said, “if we say, ‘from heaven,’ he will ask, ‘then why didn’t you believe him?’
there was someone who smoothed off his lumber with a knife with which he was making a house.
labor of childbirth
whenever you enter a house, stay there until you leave that town.
therefore, whoever takes the lowly position of this child is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
the grandmother was the one to take care of and provide sustenance for her daughter's child who was orphaned.
the world was not worthy of them. they wandered in deserts and mountains, and in caves and holes in the ground.
the son of man came eating and drinking, and you say, ‘here is a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.’
for this is the way the holy women of the past who put their hope in god used to make themselves beautiful. they were submissive to their own husbands,
do not repay evil with evil or insult with insult. on the contrary, repay evil with blessing, because to this you were called so that you may inherit a blessing.
oldest
intestines
he replied, "i will also ask you a question. tell me,
they brought the donkey and the colt and placed their cloaks on them for jesus to sit on.
one of the criminals who hung there hurled insults at him: "aren't you the christ? save yourself and us!"
rattan snare for wild rooster
if some unbeliever invites you to a meal and you want to go, eat whatever is put before you without raising questions of conscience.
so if anyone tells you, ‘there he is, out in the wilderness,’ do not go out; or, ‘here he is, in the inner rooms,’ do not believe it.
this is how it will be at the end of the age. the angels will come and separate the wicked from the righteous
as jesus started on his way, a man ran up to him and fell on his knees before him. "good teacher," he asked, "what must i do to inherit eternal life?"
authority
to finish the rim of a basket
to take someone somewhere for some purpose
the offspring of the beetles are the alibutod, katod, and langgi-on grubs.
several throws
for when we were in the realm of the flesh, the sinful passions aroused by the law were at work in us, so that we bore fruit for death.
travel
rise
salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us—
"but in those days, following that distress, " 'the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light;
what could i have done in that [i am] just a woman and so it's hard for me to give life/sustenance to our children who are still small.
the believers immediately sent paul to the coast, but silas and timothy stayed at berea.
send the people away so they can go to the surrounding countryside and villages and buy themselves something to eat."
jesus called them together and said, “you know that the rulers of the gentiles lord it over them, and their high officials exercise authority over them.
a person caps his house with a long grass so that it won't rain in.
to cut into strips
if the river has risen, it will become divided in two parts because it has passed into a secondary channel.
nevertheless, i have this against you: you tolerate that woman jezebel, who calls herself a prophet. by her teaching she misleads my servants into sexual immorality and the eating of food sacrificed to idols.
but jesus kept looking around to see who had done it.
after john was put in prison, jesus went into galilee, proclaiming the good news of god.
when the dead rise, they will neither marry nor be given in marriage; they will be like the angels in heaven.
then felix, who was well acquainted with the way, adjourned the proceedings. "when lysias the commander comes," he said, "i will decide your case."
burst (as an egg or boil)
when someone smokes, when the [cigarette] is finished burning, its ashes will drop off.
next door
we were therefore buried with him through baptism into death in order that, just as christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the father, we too may live a new life.
once when zechariah’s division was on duty and he was serving as priest before god,  he was chosen by lot, according to the custom of the priesthood, to go into the temple of the lord and burn incense.
if the carabao cannot touch bottom, it will be carried away by the current. but if the carabao can touch bottom, it will manage the current as it crosses the river.
i long to see you so that i may impart to you some spiritual gift to make you strong—
come together;
that which we step on are the steps.
let's gather closely together. we will listen to what the leader will say.
the dog's fur dropped out.
great relationship
when they landed, they saw a fire of burning coals there with fish on it, and some bread.
his father was sick in bed, suffering from fever and dysentery. paul went in to see him and, after prayer, placed his hands on him and healed him.
from there we set sail and arrived at rhegium. the next day the south wind came up, and on the following day we reached puteoli.
to be out of breath
dance kicking one's feet into the air
when martha heard that jesus was coming, she went out to meet him, but mary stayed at home.
they came to capernaum. when he was in the house, he asked them, "what were you arguing about on the road?"
again, truly i tell you that if two of you on earth agree about anything they ask for, it will be done for them by my father in heaven.
to get a thorn (in flesh)
medicine
to shed fur
exalt
instead we should write to them, telling them to abstain from food polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from the meat of strangled animals and from blood.
let us not give up meeting together, as some are in the habit of doing, but let us encourage one another--and all the more as you see the day approaching.
after this, jesus went out and saw a tax collector by the name of levi sitting at his tax booth. “follow me,” jesus said to him
not straight, not level, or off center
they; them; theirs
in him and through faith in him we may approach god with freedom and confidence.
but the temple he had spoken of was his body.
then he went down to nazareth with them and was obedient to them. but his mother treasured all these things in her heart.
formerly he was useless to you, but now he has become useful both to you and to me.
today in the town of david a savior has been born to you; he is the messiah, the lord.
he called a little child to him, and placed the child among them.
forgotten
if there are those which we-excl join together, [they are] each a small unit, [or] a satallite
now a man who was lame from birth was being carried to the temple gate called beautiful, where he was put every day to beg from those going into the temple courts.
for christ’s love compels us, because we are convinced that one died for all, and therefore all died.
when they heard this sound, a crowd came together in bewilderment, because each one heard their own language being spoken.
sold a field he owned and brought the money and put it at the apostles’ feet.
gold
for where you have envy and selfish ambition, there you find disorder and every evil practice.
and he said to his attendants, “this is john the baptist; he has risen from the dead! that is why miraculous powers are at work in him.”
and the devil, who deceived them, was thrown into the lake of burning sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet had been thrown. they will be tormented day and night for ever and ever.
suppose a brother or sister is without clothes and daily food.
kind of sugarcane
the second one married the widow, but he also died, leaving no child. it was the same with the third.
fall or slide downhill
likewise
live in harmony with one another. do not be proud, but be willing to associate with people of low position. do not be conceited.
here is a trustworthy saying: if we died with him, we will also live with him;
snatch quickly
when we look in a mirror, we see our reflection.
that wasn’t cut off carefully.
the devil led him up to a high place and showed him in an instant all the kingdoms of the world.
accumulate
squirrel
the gaze of the older monkey was behind him because they were watching their young offspring.
then paul said to him, “god will strike you, you whitewashed wall! you sit there to judge me according to the law, yet you yourself violate the law by commanding that i be struck!”
to keep for oneself
but land that produces thorns and thistles is worthless and is in danger of being cursed. in the end it will be burned.
early in the morning, jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples did not realize that it was jesus.
jesus said to him, “shall i come and heal him?”
we have not received the spirit of the world but the spirit who is from god, that we may understand what god has freely given us.
lie side by side
if there is nothing for which you would clash with your companion, our interpersonal relationships will be good.
catch or get
"but they all alike began to make excuses. the first said, 'i have just bought a field, and i must go and see it. please excuse me.'
the rain chastened us.
now jesus himself was about thirty years old when he began his ministry. he was the son, so it was thought, of joseph, the son of heli,
kerosene
white or grey hairs
“i have told you this, so that when their time comes you will remember that i warned you about them. i did not tell you this from the beginning because i was with you.”
to a trumpet blast or to such a voice speaking words that those who heard it begged that no further word be spoken to them,
you were running a good race. who cut in on you and kept you from obeying the truth?
pray that i may be rescued from the unbelievers in judea and that my service in jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints there,
he saved us, not because of righteous things we had done, but because of his mercy. he saved us through the washing of rebirth and renewal by the holy spirit,
while they were still talking about this, jesus himself stood among them and said to them, "peace be with you."
affect
to itch
hook onto
dirty
perspiration
prepare to attack
ride two on a horse.
he of whom these things are said belonged to a different tribe, and no one from that tribe has ever served at the altar. for it is clear that our lord descended from judah, and in regard to that tribe moses said nothing about priests.
they have power to shut up the heavens so that it will not rain during the time they are prophesying; and they have power to turn the waters into blood and to strike the earth with every kind of plague as often as they want.
but now revealed and made known through the prophetic writings by the command of the eternal god, so that all nations might believe and obey him--
to obliterate
to be angry or bitter towards someone; to hate
by calling this covenant "new," he has made the first one obsolete; and what is obsolete and aging will soon disappear.
but if we hope for what we do not yet have, we wait for it patiently.
and a woman was there who had been subject to bleeding for twelve years, but no one could heal her.
stain
when the lord saw her, his heart went out to her and he said, “don’t cry.”
briefly or superficially
strain with much effort
lance the boil so [the pus] will escape.
the plucking sound, that is the sound of the jew’s harp, kuglung or zither instruments.
one's stomach to feel uncomfortable
to be disappointed
cage or pen for animals
the doctor ran out of options for ann joy. even if there was something they could do to save her, she would still die.
if someone has become widowed and for three days has not been able to go out [of the house] (lit. walk), we get a piece of cloth/clothing by which we signify that it is ok now for you to run errands as this clothing is what i use to release you because i have decided to release [you].
this is the message we have heard from him and declare to you: god is light; in him there is no darkness at all.
to weave (cloth or blanket)
paw as of a dog or cat
that is why i am so eager to preach the gospel also to you who are in rome.
then some stood up and gave this false testimony against him:
if there is something which has hurt someone's feelings, there is that which makes a person upset because something was said which hurt [that person's] feelings.
yet to all who did receive him, to those who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of god—
he/she
in the same way the chief priests, the teachers of the law and the elders mocked him.
besides, they get into the habit of being idle and going about from house to house. and not only do they become idlers, but also busybodies who talk nonsense, saying things they ought not to.
he replied, "blessed rather are those who hear the word of god and obey it."
skin of pangi fruit
i in them and you in me. may they be brought to complete unity to let the world know that you sent me and have loved them even as you have loved me.
cut-down cogon grass.
in them is fulfilled the prophecy of isaiah: ‘you will be ever hearing but never understanding; you will be ever seeing but never perceiving.
when the crowd saw what paul had done, they shouted in the lycaonian language, “the gods have come down to us in human form!”
“how many loaves do you have?” jesus asked. “seven,” they replied, “and a few small fish.”
help me pound the rice.
inadequately cooked
if you let the bird go, it will fly away.
wedding
to be struck, as by light.
to try to arouse someone, as a person who is unconscious.
boil
mustache
mother's cut camote stems are gathered together which she will use to plant sweet potatoes tomorrow.
signal or point using lips
put on the full armor of god so that you can take your stand against the devil's schemes.
very early in the morning, the chief priests, with the elders, the teachers of the law and the whole sanhedrin, reached a decision. they bound jesus, led him away and handed him over to pilate.
now that you have tasted that the lord is good.
people were overwhelmed with amazement. "he has done everything well," they said. "he even makes the deaf hear and the mute speak."
if there is someone who has done wrong, if there is someone who requests mercy or forgiveness, it's not appropriate if his wrong-doing is ignored. if you forgive him, [the fault] isn't being ignored.
slap or knock
tie together to stabilize
imitate
while peter was still thinking about the vision, the spirit said to him, “simon, three men are looking for you.
to be orphaned by at least one parent
to accompany someone or something
watering of eyes from smoke or onions
i won’t sleep even with you
but now that there is no more place for me to work in these regions, and since i have been longing for many years to see you,
will fail to receive many times as much in this age, and in the age to come eternal life.”
bother
so we see that they were not able to enter, because of their unbelief.
stumble over
your gold and silver are corroded. their corrosion will testify against you and eat your flesh like fire. you have hoarded wealth in the last days.
his head was brought in on a platter and given to the girl, who carried it to her mother.
too far away for someone to travel
retract, as wheels of an airplane
no! we believe it is through the grace of our lord jesus that we are saved, just as they are.”
grace, mercy and peace from god the father and from jesus christ, the father's son, will be with us in truth and love.
tiny switch of pig’s hair worn on tayun.
albino
share food
we all stumble in many ways. if anyone is never at fault in what he says, he is a perfect man, able to keep his whole body in check.
follow the very same path as another
whatever we request, we tell our companion whatever it is that we need.
to ask someone privately.
once safely on shore, we found out that the island was called malta.
and our hope for you is firm, because we know that just as you share in our sufferings, so also you share in our comfort.
about three hours later his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.
take a minute to fasten [my buttons] because i can't manage to fasten my buttons.
ornamented, decorated, dressed up person.
he did not say this on his own, but as high priest that year he prophesied that jesus would die for the jewish nation,
i’ll use your skirts temporarily.
kind of camote with reddish skin and white inside with a purplish ring
the reason for our slowness to purchase the axe is because we will examine it like to see if it has a crack.
story song
but you are not to be like that. instead, the greatest among you should be like the youngest, and the one who rules like the one who serves.
"and if anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin, it would be better for him to be thrown into the sea with a large millstone tied around his neck.
married couple
am i now trying to win the approval of human beings, or of god? or am i trying to please people? if i were still trying to please people, i would not be a servant of christ.
then they made signs to his father, to find out what he would like to name the child.
they were felling trees today.
so they answered, "we don't know where it was from."
water
if one builds a house, he begins to make it.
bark container for storing rice
“i will not leave you as orphans; i will come to you.”
tenth
burn arms with bits of burning kapok to show endurance
he then brought them out and asked, "sirs, what must i do to be saved?"
i did not go up to jerusalem to see those who were apostles before i was, but i went into arabia. later i returned to damascus.
hen
water skippers that glide over the surface of backwaters or still pools.
bladder
if someone who promotes peace is there, your peace will rest on them; if not, it will return to you.
because you know that the testing of your faith develops perseverance.
look down
purchase transaction
give a friendship gift when visiting
finally, brothers and sisters, rejoice! strive for full restoration, encourage one another, be of one mind, live in peace. and the god of love and peace will be with you.
saul got up from the ground, but when he opened his eyes he could see nothing. so they led him by the hand into damascus.
basket with four to six corners or points
scrape
i will strike her children dead. then all the churches will know that i am he who searches hearts and minds, and i will repay each of you according to your deeds.
there remains, then, a sabbath-rest for the people of god;
now i urge you to take some food. you need it to survive. not one of you will lose a single hair from his head."
it is certainly not a lie because you have shown it to me
for there is no difference between jew and gentile—the same lord is lord of all and richly blesses all who call on him,
then they said, "why do we need any more testimony? we have heard it from his own lips."
hold them in the highest regard in love because of their work. live in peace with each other.
remember me; don’t forget me.
god had planned something better for us so that only together with us would they be made perfect.
by advocating customs unlawful for us romans to accept or practice."
the sun will be turned to darkness and the moon to blood before the coming of the great and glorious day of the lord.
now about brotherly love we do not need to write to you, for you yourselves have been taught by god to love each other.
there are seven day(s) in a week.
"i told them that it is not the roman custom to hand over any man before he has faced his accusers and has had an opportunity to defend himself against their charges.
life
so that your faith might not rest on human wisdom, but on god’s power.
"he committed no sin, and no deceit was found in his mouth."
he himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, so that we might die to sins and live for righteousness; by his wounds you have been healed.
to touch each other
so the women hurried away from the tomb, afraid yet filled with joy, and ran to tell his disciples.
a bodyguard.
covet
spine of a leaf
it's not possible to borrow it because the horse's foot is sore.
centipede
confident of your obedience, i write to you, knowing that you will do even more than i ask.
when there is someone to take care of a child, the mother can get away by herself.
they have known me for a long time and can testify, if they are willing, that i conformed to the strictest sect of our religion, living as a pharisee.
andrew, philip, bartholomew, matthew, thomas, james son of alphaeus, thaddaeus, simon the zealot
if there are children who are eating and there is a lot of rice which falls to the floor, they are wasting the food.
for i know your eagerness to help, and i have been boasting about it to the macedonians, telling them that since last year you in achaia were ready to give; and your enthusiasm has stirred most of them to action.
i like this
i’ll get lonely if they’re slow in returning.
nevertheless, god's solid foundation stands firm, sealed with this inscription: "the lord knows those who are his," and, "everyone who confesses the name of the lord must turn away from wickedness."
how can you believe since you accept glory from one another but do not seek the glory that comes from the only god?
beach or rocky bottom of a river
"but not during the feast," they said, "or the people may riot."
moreover, we have all had human fathers who disciplined us and we respected them for it. how much more should we submit to the father of our spirits and live!
i eagerly expect and hope that i will in no way be ashamed, but will have sufficient courage so that now as always christ will be exalted in my body, whether by life or by death.
for i see that you are full of bitterness and captive to sin.”
sleep tight
benighted
yet you refuse to come to me to have life.
for even when i was in thessalonica, you sent me aid again and again when i was in need.
straighten bones, adjust bones, massage.
tree bark (used for making walls, baskets, or roofing)
kind of white rice
i bumped my elbow against a chair.
leave a remnant, not use up everything
what if some were unfaithful? will their unfaithfulness nullify god’s faithfulness?
“from this man’s descendants god has brought to israel the savior jesus, as he promised.
to be disappointed.
i'll shoo the chickens with “saa”.
solidify, as grease or jello when cold
when someone holes-up, we stay there in the mountains. we take refuge when there are raiders.
the angel said to me, "these words are trustworthy and true. the lord, the god of the spirits of the prophets, sent his angel to show his servants the things that must soon take place."
i watched as the lamb opened the first of the seven seals. then i heard one of the four living creatures say in a voice like thunder, “come!”
the people read it and were glad for its encouraging message.
morning
her legs were crossing as she was walking
then he returned to the disciples and said to them, “are you still sleeping and resting? look, the hour has come, and the son of man is delivered into the hands of sinners.
just then his disciples returned and were surprised to find him talking with a woman. but no one asked, “what do you want?” or “why are you talking with her?”
this is the promise our twelve tribes are hoping to see fulfilled as they earnestly serve god day and night. king agrippa, it is because of this hope that these jews are accusing me.
tobacco.
bathe the child who has become dirty.
dear friend, you are faithful in what you are doing for the brothers, even though they are strangers to you.
a woven rattan chicken carrier.
good, a good situation; blessing
when we ride a jeep from valencia, when we get to baguntaas , it is halfway to nasuli. that is the halfway point of the ride.
“i have no husband,” she replied. jesus said to her, “you are right when you say you have no husband.
and he began to teach them. he said:
for there are three that testify:
i'll borrow [someone's] land.
feed
paper wasp.
therefore you do not lack any spiritual gift as you eagerly wait for our lord jesus christ to be revealed.
nor did he enter heaven to offer himself again and again, the way the high priest enters the most holy place every year with blood that is not his own.
a river tributary of the liboganon
when they kept on questioning him, he straightened up and said to them, “let any one of you who is without sin be the first to throw a stone at her.”
if any of you has a dispute with another, dare he take it before the ungodly for judgment instead of before the saints?
esus did many other things as well. if every one of them were written down, i suppose that even the whole world would not have room for the books that would be written.
as the time approached for him to be taken up to heaven, jesus resolutely set out for jerusalem.
thanks be to god for his indescribable gift!
so then, the law is holy, and the commandment is holy, righteous and good.
for where you have envy and selfish ambition, there you find disorder and every evil practice.
what anyone else dares to boast about--i am speaking as a fool--i also dare to boast about. are they hebrews? so am i. are they israelites? so am i. are they abraham's descendants? so am i.
on hearing this, they were baptized in the name of the lord jesus.
easily
“now when david had served god’s purpose in his own generation, he fell asleep; he was buried with his ancestors and his body decayed.
to sit or squat
a bird similar to purple martin
“why do you call me, ‘lord, lord,’ and do not do what i say?
be diligent in these matters; give yourself wholly to them, so that everyone may see your progress.
before the famine reached them, boybayan went after wild camotes.
the wasps were disturbed by having water poured on them and then elena was stung.
therefore do not let anyone judge you by what you eat or drink, or with regard to a religious festival, a new moon celebration or a sabbath day.
denim is sturdy.
whether women or men, the relationship of the spouses of their siblings is called patala-iras "spouses-in-law."
he gave him no inheritance here, not even enough ground to set his foot on. but god promised him that he and his descendants after him would possess the land, even though at that time abraham had no child.
the spirit that governs the relationship between the sexes
and now you will be silent and not able to speak until the day this happens, because you did not believe my words, which will come true at their appointed time.”
get soaked
the kings of the earth rise up and the rulers band together against the lord and against his anointed one.’
then simon peter, who had a sword, drew it and struck the high priest’s servant, cutting off his right ear. (the servant’s name was malchus.)
leaf out
a carried lunch
fearful,
“they are not of the world, even as i am not of it.”
jesus answered them, "it is not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick.
they worship me in vain; their teachings are but rules taught by men.'
the watching of the older monkeys is turned around because surprisingly it is their offspring, [the] baby monkey, which is the one to watch out for them.
selfish
peanuts
but jesus remained silent and gave no answer. again the high priest asked him, "are you the christ, the son of the blessed one?"
live somewhere
posterity
sneak up
those who have served well gain an excellent standing and great assurance in their faith in christ jesus.
he will punish those who do not know god and do not obey the gospel of our lord jesus.
pray that your flight will not take place in winter or on the sabbath.
the man who was healed had no idea who it was, for jesus had slipped away into the crowd that was there.
mildew
you will look for me, but you will not find me; and where i am, you cannot come."
"he who is not with me is against me, and he who does not gather with me, scatters.
to move in multiple directions while doing something
large biting ant
she would say that her rice will be wasted because she cannot finish weeding
when they looked up, they saw no one except jesus.
then the mother of zebedee’s sons came to jesus with her sons and, kneeling down, asked a favor of him.
especially
the lord answered him, "you hypocrites! doesn't each of you on the sabbath untie his ox or donkey from the stall and lead it out to give it water?
as you are going with your adversary to the magistrate, try hard to be reconciled to him on the way, or he may drag you off to the judge, and the judge turn you over to the officer, and the officer throw you into prison.
in reply jesus said: “a man was going down from jerusalem to jericho, when he was attacked by robbers. they stripped him of his clothes, beat him and went away, leaving him half dead.
i will set out and go back to my father and say to him: father, i have sinned against heaven and against you.
kill, murdered.
“all that belongs to the father is mine. that is why i said the spirit will receive from me what he will make known to you.”
they replied, "believe in the lord jesus, and you will be saved--you and your household."
but whoever hates his brother is in the darkness and walks around in the darkness; he does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded him.
when we look at the date of a month, we need to reserve a time when nothing conflicts so that the gathering together will happen.
peaceful feeling
the albino  antabun heron has no mixture of design because it is completely white.
so he called in each one of his master’s debtors. he asked the first, ‘how much do you owe my master?’
meaning.
i'll bend toward you (to delouse).
and if christ has not been raised, our preaching is useless and so is your faith.
after he had said this, he dismissed the assembly.
so the pharisees and teachers of the law asked jesus, "why don't your disciples live according to the tradition of the elders instead of eating their food with 'unclean' hands?"
many
her neighbors and relatives heard that the lord had shown her great mercy, and they shared her joy.
within hearing distance
fill or plug
and, after looking at himself, goes away and immediately forgets what he looks like.
by faith he kept the passover and the sprinkling of blood, so that the destroyer of the firstborn would not touch the firstborn of israel.
when they had crossed over, they landed at gennesaret.
all these people gave their gifts out of their wealth; but she out of her poverty put in all she had to live on."
coffin
when she saw peter warming himself, she looked closely at him. "you also were with that nazarene, jesus," she said.
then the high priest stood up before them and asked jesus, "are you not going to answer? what is this testimony that these men are bringing against you?"
to dredge a river with leaves to get fish
have a war
benita married as a child.
and if what was transitory came with glory, how much greater is the glory of that which lasts!
crab
my daughter, jeany, fell from a santol tree.
for such men are false apostles, deceitful workmen, masquerading as apostles of christ.
if we are careful about our conduct, our lives will be orderly.
a kind of rattan.
to him who is able to keep you from falling and to present you before his glorious presence without fault and with great joy-- to the only god our savior be glory, majesty, power and authority, through jesus christ our lord, before all ages, now and forevermore! amen.
vulgar
"you mean he has deceived you also?" the pharisees retorted.
he went away a second time and prayed, “my father, if it is not possible for this cup to be taken away unless i drink it, may your will be done.”
go through
others said, "he is the christ."
from then on judas watched for an opportunity to hand him over.
cornfield
these were all commended for their faith, yet none of them received what had been promised.
another disciple said to him, “lord, first let me go and bury my father.”
therefore many of the jews who had come to visit mary, and had seen what jesus did, put their faith in him.
once the crowd realized that neither jesus nor his disciples were there, they got into the boats and went to capernaum in search of jesus.
close together
god is just: he will pay back trouble to those who trouble you
and he was amazed at their lack of faith.
but the jews who refused to believe stirred up the other gentiles and poisoned their minds against the brothers.
jesus replied, "the hour has come for the son of man to be glorified.
if the tail of a puppy is tipped with white, people will not make a pet of it because they think it is bad luck.
rash, such as from heat
this is how we know that we love the children of god: by loving god and carrying out his commands.
and besides all this, between us and you a great chasm has been set in place, so that those who want to go from here to you cannot, nor can anyone cross over from there to us.’
fragrant herb used in cooking
breast
anything invaded by weevils
igì’s hair is very black.
use it to swat blowflies.
straight
"behold, i am coming soon! my reward is with me, and i will give to everyone according to what he has done.
yet now i am happy, not because you were made sorry, but because your sorrow led you to repentance. for you became sorrowful as god intended and so were not harmed in any way by us.
so too, a levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the other side.
nipa palm before it is cut
if there are a lot of dirty spider webs, we brush off the webs of the spiders so that they will be removed. when you brush them off, the debris drops to the floor.
for since death came through a man, the resurrection of the dead comes also through a man.
writhe.
sleep deeply
you have not come to a mountain that can be touched and that is burning with fire; to darkness, gloom and storm;
when we catch large fish, we roast some until partially cooked so that it will become stiff and not be wasted.
hole, ditch
woe to you, teachers of the law and pharisees, you hypocrites! you build tombs for the prophets and decorate the graves of the righteous.
and when they had mocked him, they took off the purple robe and put his own clothes on him. then they led him out to crucify him.
onions.
uncircumcised
they had a few small fish as well; he gave thanks for them also and told the disciples to distribute them.
deceptive, tricky
grandpa
and when the demon was driven out, the man who had been mute spoke. the crowd was amazed and said, “nothing like this has ever been seen in israel.”
to show mercy to our ancestors and to remember his holy covenant,
to be taut, tightened
to bury in soil, as a body or other item; cemetery
why, you do not even know what will happen tomorrow. what is your life? you are a mist that appears for a little while and then vanishes.
to open up as a book
as for the po-it fish [lit. creatures of the water which are po-it], its soup is good for the nursing mother because her breasts will produce milk.
i know your deeds, your hard work and your perseverance. i know that you cannot tolerate wicked people, that you have tested those who claim to be apostles but are not, and have found them false.
“at that time moses was born, and he was no ordinary child. for three months he was cared for by his family.
but paul said to the officers: "they beat us publicly without a trial, even though we are roman citizens, and threw us into prison. and now do they want to get rid of us quietly? no! let them come themselves and escort us out."
and no one pours new wine into old wineskins. if he does, the wine will burst the skins, and both the wine and the wineskins will be ruined. no, he pours new wine into new wineskins."
now the passover and the feast of unleavened bread were only two days away, and the chief priests and the teachers of the law were looking for some sly way to arrest jesus and kill him.
be affected by a dove’s call
when the ten heard about this, they became indignant with james and john.
cleaned area of ground, yard
in that day you will no longer ask me anything. i tell you the truth, my father will give you whatever you ask in my name.
every man who prays or prophesies with his head covered dishonors his head.
jesus entered jerusalem and went to the temple. he looked around at everything, but since it was already late, he went out to bethany with the twelve.
so it is also stated elsewhere: ‘you will not let your holy one see decay.’
as for the teacher, he/she teaches the students.
lump in throat
lie
among them were mary magdalene, mary the mother of james and joseph, and the mother of zebedee’s sons.
then he will say to those on his left, ‘depart from me, you who are cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
kind of white rice
kind of snake said to be poisonous
the person who has a lot of animals is called wealthy.
a kind of short cogon grass.
jesus had been speaking of his death, but his disciples thought he meant natural sleep.
to clear field old rice plants, especially rice, to clear field for planting camotes.
the men seized jesus and arrested him.
the reason for whispering.
marmot's mound
non-intentive mode prefix of an action or event which is abilitative, non-intentional
tree roots used for planting.
and the four angels who had been kept ready for this very hour and day and month and year were released to kill a third of mankind.
on the next sabbath almost the whole city gathered to hear the word of the lord.
for in this hope we were saved. but hope that is seen is no hope at all. who hopes for what they already have?
therefore, my dear brothers, stand firm. let nothing move you. always give yourselves fully to the work of the lord, because you know that your labor in the lord is not in vain.
to sleep soundly
neither do people pour new wine into old wineskins. if they do, the skins will burst; the wine will run out and the wineskins will be ruined. no, they pour new wine into new wineskins, and both are preserved.”
and if by grace, then it cannot be based on works; if it were, grace would no longer be grace.
do not be like them, for your father knows what you need before you ask him.
you
the water has puddled.
he bent over and looked in at the strips of linen lying there but did not go in.
even in the case of lifeless things that make sounds, such as the pipe or harp, how will anyone know what tune is being played unless there is a distinction in the notes?
mouth
kind of black rice
dried out plants on the beach were uprooted and whirled around as they were carried upwards.
split lip
to plant something by laying a portion of plant parallel to or slightly slanted to the ground such as sugarcane so that it will develop roots.
we didn’t know that others would arrive.
about
jesus answered them, “have you never read what david did when he and his companions were hungry?
so he sent two of his disciples, telling them, "go into the city, and a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. follow him.
but even if i am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and service coming from your faith, i am glad and rejoice with all of you.
"his master answered, 'you take charge of five cities.'
the man who loves his life will lose it, while the man who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.
moonless
on the contrary: "if your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink. in doing this, you will heap burning coals on his head."
the reason we say we sit in a circle to eat together is because we are facing each other.
corn field
we will let him know.
beyond all question, the mystery of godliness is great: he appeared in a body, was vindicated by the spirit, was seen by angels, was preached among the nations, was believed on in the world, was taken up in glory.
if you know his will and approve of what is superior because you are instructed by the law;
the faith and love that spring from the hope stored up for you in heaven and about which you have already heard in the true message of the gospel
then paul left the synagogue and went next door to the house of titius justus, a worshiper of god.
jesus went up on a mountainside and called to him those he wanted, and they came to him.
for three days he was blind, and did not eat or drink anything.
when barnabas and saul had finished their mission, they returned from jerusalem, taking with them john, also called mark.
the cat leans back and over when it summer-salts when it plays with other cats.
the man without the spirit does not accept the things that come from the spirit of god, for they are foolishness to him, and he cannot understand them, because they are spiritually discerned.
pardon
enter, go into; break out (as in a rash)
then ‘a new king, to whom joseph meant nothing, came to power in egypt.’
lump in throat
bamboo eel trap
"no one can come to me unless the father who sent me draws him, and i will raise him up at the last day
i am no longer worthy to be called your son; make me like one of your hired men.
platform above the hearth used for drying wood.
that which is planted, like corn, rice, monggo beans, and ulibon grain, those are what are planted because we drop [the seeds] as they are planted.
wash out (as a dam or bridge)
therefore, since these facts are undeniable, you ought to be quiet and not do anything rash.
to trigger off
a kind of hornbill.
meet on the way from different directions
a man with leprosy came to him and begged him on his knees, "if you are willing, you can make me clean."
my dear children, for whom i am again in the pains of childbirth until christ is formed in you,
to harvest
when they had rowed three or three and a half miles, they saw jesus approaching the boat, walking on the water; and they were terrified.
if our sleep is good, we will sleep soundly and it will be a long time before we get up.
i, paul, write this greeting in my own hand.
after a marriage, the man will take the woman he has married to their home for a period of time as per agreement with her parents.
jesus answered, "if i want him to remain alive until i return, what is that to you? you must follow me."
when jesus landed and saw a large crowd, he had compassion on them and healed their sick.
woe to you, teachers of the law and pharisees, you hypocrites! you give a tenth of your spices—mint, dill and cumin. but you have neglected the more important matters of the law—justice, mercy and faithfulness. you should have practiced the latter, without neglecting the former.
cutting
my brothers, some from chloe's household have informed me that there are quarrels among you.
the second house, that is the one between the first and the third house.
the next morning the jews formed a conspiracy and bound themselves with an oath not to eat or drink until they had killed paul.
that conforms to the gospel concerning the glory of the blessed god, which he entrusted to me.
after this i looked and there before me was a great multitude that no one could count, from every nation, tribe, people and language, standing before the throne and in front of the lamb. they were wearing white robes and were holding palm branches in their hands.
forest plant
however, after his brothers had left for the festival, he went also, not publicly, but in secret.
lack
when jesus' followers saw what was going to happen, they said, "lord, should we strike with our swords?"
thought; thinking
it is true that some preach christ out of envy and rivalry, but others out of goodwill. the latter do so in love, knowing that i am put here for the defense of the gospel. the former preach christ out of selfish ambition, not sincerely, supposing that they can stir up trouble for me while i am in chains.
as surely as the truth of christ is in me, nobody in the regions of achaia will stop this boasting of mine.
a [camote-like] tuber with climbing vine
they cut the meat up and then divided it into shares and then they had the person who carried the pig on his back take the head.
timothy, guard what has been entrusted to your care. turn away from godless chatter and the opposing ideas of what is falsely called knowledge,
a person who doesn’t fight back will be called cowardly by a person who is fierce: “you are actually a coward.”
since you are going through the same struggle you saw i had, and now hear that i still have.
predict
size
when his family heard about this, they went to take charge of him, for they said, "he is out of his mind."
suddenly a sound like the blowing of a violent wind came from heaven and filled the whole house where they were sitting.
a rat
“all things have been committed to me by my father. no one knows who the son is except the father, and no one knows who the father is except the son and those to whom the son chooses to reveal him.”
group reciprocal work
straighten out legs when sitting or lying.
i'll borrow [someone's] land.
to make a canal/drain to divert water
if you worship me, it will all be yours.”
the poor you will always have with you, but you will not always have me.
prep by
"or suppose a woman has ten silver coins and loses one. does she not light a lamp, sweep the house and search carefully until she finds it?
those who mourn, as if they did not; those who are happy, as if they were not; those who buy something, as if it were not theirs to keep;
so i will cast her on a bed of suffering, and i will make those who commit adultery with her suffer intensely, unless they repent of her ways.
stink bug.
even though we speak like this, dear friends, we are confident of better things in your case--things that accompany salvation.
therefore let us keep the festival, not with the old bread leavened with malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
moldy with grey, fuzzy mold
"what do you want with us, jesus of nazareth? have you come to destroy us? i know who you are--the holy one of god!"
to him be glory in the church and in christ jesus throughout all generations, for ever and ever! amen.
then some jews came from antioch and iconium and won the crowd over. they stoned paul and dragged him outside the city, thinking he was dead.
to extinguish
they asked each other, "were not our hearts burning within us while he talked with us on the road and opened the scriptures to us?"
i'll work by the day for aunt domingga so that i can earn [some] money
when the disciples saw him walking on the lake, they were terrified. “it’s a ghost,” they said, and cried out in fear.
for none of us lives for ourselves alone, and none of us dies for ourselves alone.
and exchanged the glory of the immortal god for images made to look like a mortal human being and birds and animals and reptiles.
joanna the wife of chuza, the manager of herod’s household; susanna; and many others. these women were helping to support them out of their own means.
he regarded disgrace for the sake of christ as of greater value than the treasures of egypt, because he was looking ahead to his reward.
an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of little children, because you have in the law the embodiment of knowledge and truth—
therefore, if you have disputes about such matters, do you ask for a ruling from those whose way of life is scorned in the church?
outer side
when he came near the place where the road goes down the mount of olives, the whole crowd of disciples began joyfully to praise god in loud voices for all the miracles they had seen:
for we who are alive are always being given over to death for jesus’ sake, so that his life may also be revealed in our mortal body.
then jesus went around teaching from village to village. calling the twelve to him, he sent them out two by two and gave them authority over evil spirits.
cold
she will take care of her child while the mother is working.  she will hold the child on her lap.  have it nurse.
the leaders are having a group discussion about whether there will be [eventual] reciprocal exhanges for a brideprice.
loosen
that namu torch, it is what is used to release ??  the smoke so that the bees will be smoked and leave.
glisten
indeed he was ill, and almost died. but god had mercy on him, and not on him only but also on me, to spare me sorrow upon sorrow.
get out!
above all, you must understand that no prophecy of scripture came about by the prophet's own interpretation.
now a man who was lame from birth was being carried to the temple gate called beautiful, where he was put every day to beg from those going into the temple courts.
pale, anemic
that which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked at and our hands have touched-- this we proclaim concerning the word of life.
advice or teaching
“jesus of nazareth,” they replied. “i am he,” jesus said. (and judas the traitor was standing there with them.)
and if any place will not welcome you or listen to you, shake the dust off your feet when you leave, as a testimony against them."
but if we say, ‘of human origin’—we are afraid of the people, for they all hold that john was a prophet.”
it's like ann joy whose illness was difficult. we lost hope because she could no longer live.
if we love our neighbors (lit. companion), they will also love us.
to decrease in size
tuyo-ong’s grave collapsed and washed away.
with many other words he warned them; and he pleaded with them, “save yourselves from this corrupt generation.”
small dark lizard
life is more than food, and the body more than clothes.
he replied, “i saw satan fall like lightning from heaven.
be obstructed
jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of the boy, and he was healed at that moment.
just then his disciples returned and were surprised to find him talking with a woman. but no one asked, “what do you want?” or “why are you talking with her?”
therefore no one will be declared righteous in god’s sight by the works of the law; rather, through the law we become conscious of our sin.
peter knocked at the outer entrance, and a servant named rhoda came to answer the door.
for we do not have a high priest who is unable to empathize with our weaknesses, but we have one who has been tempted in every way, just as we are—yet he did not sin.
the wasps were disturbed by having water poured on them and then elena was stung.
be cursed due to disrespect for elders
you’re going to suffer a change of circumstances tomorrow when your companions aren’t here.
the disciples had forgotten to bring bread, except for one loaf they had with them in the boat.
so, because you are lukewarm-- neither hot nor cold--i am about to spit you out of my mouth.
praise be to the god and father of our lord jesus christ! in his great mercy he has given us new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of jesus christ from the dead,
for in scripture it says: “see, i lay a stone in zion, a chosen and precious cornerstone, and the one who trusts in him will never be put to shame.”
deacons, likewise, are to be men worthy of respect, sincere, not indulging in much wine, and not pursuing dishonest gain.
this house was completed.
collar bone.
that [word] race each other is a game. they get in sacks and run. the one who is able to finish [first] is the one who wins.
one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues came and said to me, "come, i will show you the bride, the wife of the lamb."
here is a trustworthy saying: whoever aspires to be an overseer desires a noble task.
but you are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, god’s special possession, that you may declare the praises of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.
"you are not yet fifty years old," the jews said to him, "and you have seen abraham!"
this is a lake that has no outlet for the water.
how can you say to your brother, ‘brother, let me take the speck out of your eye,’ when you yourself fail to see the plank in your own eye? you hypocrite, first take the plank out of your eye, and then you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.
a kind of tree the leaves
when he gave the letter [to me], he instructed ) [me] to add to it by word of mouth to insure that [the person] would set aside some corn [for him].
attack and bite, of pig, dog, horse
outside marks of a tattoo
peel sugarcane with knife
the pharisees and sadducees came to jesus and tested him by asking him to show them a sign from heaven.
and god placed all things under his feet and appointed him to be head over everything for the church,
freckle
dear children, this is the last hour; and as you have heard that the antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have come. this is how we know it is the last hour.
affix for irrealis, having various grammatical functions.
a canaanite woman from that vicinity came to him, crying out, “lord, son of david, have mercy on me! my daughter is demon-possessed and suffering terribly.”
"a new command i give you: love one another. as i have loved you, so you must love one another.
the two of them, sent on their way by the holy spirit, went down to seleucia and sailed from there to cyprus.
stroke or pet an animal
if someone shivers, they begin to have chills.
for, “everyone who calls on the name of the lord will be saved.”
you supposed the rice was all gone, but there’s still some.
to open, as someone's hand, a book, a door, a lid, two sides of a clam
they don't have time to come for a visit because they have a lot of work.
don’t give the clothing out on credit.
on one occasion an expert in the law stood up to test jesus. “teacher,” he asked, “what must i do to inherit eternal life?”
that he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked.
what then shall we say? that the gentiles, who did not pursue righteousness, have obtained it, a righteousness that is by faith;
the music of harpists and musicians, flute players and trumpeters, will never be heard in you again. no workman of any trade will ever be found in you again. the sound of a millstone will never be heard in you again.
she isn’t a nice-looking woman
i will not speak with you much longer, for the prince of this world is coming. he has no hold on me,
reach some place.
he called them together, along with the workmen in related trades, and said: "men, you know we receive a good income from this business.
to nod head in assent
there they offered jesus wine to drink, mixed with gall; but after tasting it, he refused to drink it.
a faith and knowledge resting on the hope of eternal life, which god, who does not lie, promised before the beginning of time,
as for the child who has been neglected, he/she is lacking food, clothing, bathing and has no house to live in.
if someone has an infected sore, he will peel off some tobacco and apply it to the sore to keep off the flies.
to all in rome who are loved by god and called to be his holy people: grace and peace to you from god our father and from the lord jesus christ.
the land of mindanao, because it is surrounded by the ocean, it is isolated from the land.
god spoke to him in this way: ‘for four hundred years your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own, and they will be enslaved and mistreated.
when the cut field has dried up, finally [the ftrees in] the field are felled.
for this was how the promise was stated: “at the appointed time i will return, and sarah will have a son.”
speak
immediately the girl stood up and walked around (she was twelve years old). at this they were completely astonished.
a baby monkey.
spy
consider him who endured such opposition from sinners, so that you will not grow weary and lose heart.
"my soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death," he said to them. "stay here and keep watch."
if someone shivers, they begin to have chills.
that which we use to scrape the wood so that it will be smooth which was made into a scraper which came from balakayu bamboo.
there some people brought to him a man who was deaf and could hardly talk, and they begged him to place his hand on the man.
he was with god in the beginning.
but the other criminal rebuked him. "don't you fear god," he said, "since you are under the same sentence?
some men brought to him a paralyzed man, lying on a mat. when jesus saw their faith, he said to the man, “take heart, son; your sins are forgiven.”
i’ll pour the tobacco shreds into your palm.
produce fruit in keeping with repentance.
fish palm [tree]
jesus sent him away at once with a strong warning: "see that you don't tell this to anyone. but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the sacrifices that moses commanded for your cleansing, as a testimony to them."
the world and its desires pass away, but the man who does the will of god lives forever.
one of those days jesus went out to a mountainside to pray, and spent the night praying to god.
a cavern or a tunnel
“i too was convinced that i ought to do all that was possible to oppose the name of jesus of nazareth.
tomorrow
charge interest
"but at the beginning of creation god 'made them male and female.'
large wart
did that which is good, then, become death to me? by no means! nevertheless, in order that sin might be recognized as sin, it used what is good to bring about my death, so that through the commandment sin might become utterly sinful.
topic of conversation
since you are going through the same struggle you saw i had, and now hear that i still have.
bounce
there are days when we don’t have an appetite. we choose what we desire to eat.
but the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
“return home and tell how much god has done for you.” so the man went away and told all over town how much jesus had done for him.
reach out and snap off something
this is a trustworthy saying. and i want you to stress these things, so that those who have trusted in god may be careful to devote themselves to doing what is good. these things are excellent and profitable for everyone.
so that even handkerchiefs and aprons that had touched him were taken to the sick, and their illnesses were cured and the evil spirits left them.
a wave or breaker
without love, unforgiving, slanderous, without self-control, brutal, not lovers of the good,
if it is to encourage, then give encouragement; if it is giving, then give generously; if it is to lead, do it diligently; if it is to show mercy, do it cheerfully.
old rice
“i pray for them. i am not praying for the world, but for those you have given me, for they are yours.”
to be cheated; suffer loss in bargain or exchange.
‘no,’ he answered, ‘because while you are pulling the weeds, you may uproot the wheat with them.
as for a stringy camoty,  it isn't seen until it is cookedl
be mindful to give rice to our neighbors.
solid, durable
you are to abstain from food sacrificed to idols, from blood, from the meat of strangled animals and from sexual immorality. you will do well to avoid these things. farewell.
the niece who had been recently married was broken loose from her marriage relationship by her aunt because she had simply advised her to desert her husband.
there were about twelve men in all.
invite
for he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight. in love
to travel by moonlight
he did not say anything to them without using a parable. but when he was alone with his own disciples, he explained everything.
we are experiencing good things.
but for that very reason i was shown mercy so that in me, the worst of sinners, christ jesus might display his immense patience as an example for those who would believe in him and receive eternal life.
to attach firmly
they weren’t included
the royal official said, “sir, come down before my child dies.”
we test the water by touching it with our finger [to see] whether the warmth is just right.
so the twelve gathered all the disciples together and said, “it would not be right for us to neglect the ministry of the word of god in order to wait on tables.
but didn't find his body. they came and told us that they had seen a vision of angels, who said he was alive.
crook one’s finger
or do you not know that the lord’s people will judge the world? and if you are to judge the world, are you not competent to judge trivial cases?
to be in the process of eating
you take a pinch of salt.
play ghost
so we urged titus, just as he had earlier made a beginning, to bring also to completion this act of grace on your part.
he is not the god of the dead, but of the living. you are badly mistaken!"
needle
ve found you out.“what is your secret about me?”
jesus called them together and said, “you know that the rulers of the gentiles lord it over them, and their high officials exercise authority over them.
i have made you known to them, and will continue to make you known in order that the love you have for me may be in them and that i myself may be in them."
when bees swarm, they just stay in their hive for a week and then leave the hive as they transfer.
and again in the passage above he says, “they shall never enter my rest.”
large white camote with first texture.
and everyone went to their own town to register.
stop with me in your giving; don’t give anyone else than me
when the sky is clear, the clouds are just thin and the rays of the sun [shine] through.
chew noisily, chomp
slowness
quiver, as a chicken before laying an egg
to be knowledgeable about something
therefore, i will punish him and then release him."
the wall was made of jasper, and the city of pure gold, as pure as glass.
prop
the people who lived long ago, they still wore g-strings because they didn't yet have very much material.
quiet, shy
i am sending him to you for this very purpose, that you may know how we are, and that he may encourage you.
error
"righteous father, though the world does not know you, i know you, and they know that you have sent me.
someone gave me a letter. that person whom i knew said, “i'm sending a message please that i will travel upriver to maambago.”
measure each other
scaffolding is the temporary structure on which we stand when we build the body of a house.
parthians, medes and elamites; residents of mesopotamia, judea and cappadocia, pontus and asia,
confess
then he appeared to james, then to all the apostles,
what relation
it will be good for that servant whom the master finds doing so when he returns.
then they prayed, “lord, you know everyone’s heart. show us which of these two you have chosen
uprooted tree
and judas iscariot, who betrayed him.
he answered, “a wicked and adulterous generation asks for a sign! but none will be given it except the sign of the prophet jonah.
i always thank my god for you because of his grace given you in christ jesus.
the liboganon river was dammed up so that it could be used to water the rice paddy.
therefore, dear friends, since you already know this, be on your guard so that you may not be carried away by the error of lawless men and fall from your secure position.
peter answered: “may your money perish with you, because you thought you could buy the gift of god with money!
when he found one of great value, he went away and sold everything he had and bought it.
break and fall over
keep stoking the fire because we’re hungry.
snort
poke
beloved
share with god's people who are in need. practice hospitality.
a plant with smooth, flexible stems which has a soft, spongy core.
this then is how we know that we belong to the truth, and how we set our hearts at rest in his presence whenever our hearts condemn us. for god is greater than our hearts, and he knows everything.
and being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to death-- even death on a cross!
to obliterate
go ahead and do something
therefore judge nothing before the appointed time; wait until the lord comes. he will bring to light what is hidden in darkness and will expose the motives of the heart. at that time each will receive their praise from god.
disappear
feel upset, hurt, sad, or angry
and if you have not been trustworthy with someone else’s property, who will give you property of your own?
this is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
if the accusation is true that a person has done wrong, they will pay up front for the settlement of one who has sinned.
were they born just a month ago?
lose one's balance
then the angel said to me, “write this: blessed are those who are invited to the wedding supper of the lamb!” and he added, “these are the true words of god.”
they called out in a loud voice, “how long, sovereign lord, holy and true, until you judge the inhabitants of the earth and avenge our blood?”
to be orphaned by at least one parent
to think about something; consider, ponder
ninth
because they all saw him and were terrified.
to rot from water
have someone give something to oneself
and again in the passage above he says, “they shall never enter my rest.”
as soon as
now this is our boast: our conscience testifies that we have conducted ourselves in the world, and especially in our relations with you, in the holiness and sincerity that are from god. we have done so not according to worldly wisdom but according to god's grace.
but the pharisees and the teachers of the law who belonged to their sect complained to his disciples, "why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and 'sinners'?"
the beast was given a mouth to utter proud words and blasphemies and to exercise its authority for forty-two months.
bone
since that time he waits for his enemies to be made his footstool,
now is the time for judgment on this world; now the prince of this world will be driven out.
the master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he is not aware of.
no one, then, should refuse to accept him. send him on his way in peace so that he may return to me. i am expecting him along with the brothers.
there is no one to watch her children so she won't be able to dig camotes.
sore, encrusted, runny, red eyes (pink eye)
but those who are considered worthy of taking part in that age and in the resurrection from the dead will neither marry nor be given in marriage,
blessed is she who has believed that the lord would fulfill his promises to her!”
kind of bird weighing around 3 kilos
then the righteous will answer him, ‘lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to drink?
we were nearly kidnapped by raiders.
therefore, if what i eat causes my brother to fall into sin, i will never eat meat again, so that i will not cause him to fall
so many gathered that there was no room left, not even outside the door, and he preached the word to them. some men came, bringing to him a paralytic, carried by four of them.
"everything is permissible"--but not everything is beneficial. "everything is permissible"--but not everything is constructive.
for from within, out of men's hearts, come evil thoughts, sexual immorality, theft, murder, adultery,
we just lean away from something because there is that which is smelly.
and brought him first to annas, who was the father-in-law of caiaphas, the high priest that year.
walk vigorously
close together
and we also thank god continually because, when you received the word of god, which you heard from us, you accepted it not as the word of men, but as it actually is, the word of god, which is at work in you who believe.
no, but the sacrifices of pagans are offered to demons, not to god, and i do not want you to be participants with demons.
we hunger for fish and meat when we harvest.
the commander dismissed the young man and cautioned him, "don't tell anyone that you have reported this to me."
not only so, but we also glory in our sufferings, because we know that suffering produces perseverance;
that is why i am so eager to preach the gospel also to you who are in rome.
we have plenty of food now.
they had peter and john brought before them and began to question them: “by what power or what name did you do this?”
large black coconut beetle
to make a crunchy sound (when someone walks through dry vegetation)
to be benighted
tame
a person makes wood shavings so that he can ignite them with a match.
"you will all fall away," jesus told them, "for it is written: " 'i will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.'
graze, as spear or bullet
after this the lord appointed seventy-two others and sent them two by two ahead of him to every town and place where he was about to go.
do everything without complaining or arguing,
at that time the disciples came to jesus and asked, “who, then, is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?”
thing or something
when he opened the abyss, smoke rose from it like the smoke from a gigantic furnace. the sun and sky were darkened by the smoke from the abyss.
sandpaper
cut up kolut like potato chips
when the sun is at it's zenith, if we walk on the beach which is all sand, when we step [on it], the heat scorches our feet which is like being burned.
narrow passage between two cliffs
know that a man is not justified by observing the law, but by faith in jesus christ. so we, too, have put our faith in christ jesus that we may be justified by faith in christ and not by observing the law, because by observing the law no one will be justified.
rather, as servants of god we commend ourselves in every way: in great endurance; in troubles, hardships and distresses;
do everything in love.
in the time of herod king of judea there was a priest named zechariah, who belonged to the priestly division of abijah; his wife elizabeth was also a descendant of aaron.
stuffy nose
wing of a bird or chicken
the water came into the boat.
angry.
the voice spoke to him a second time, “do not call anything impure that god has made clean.”
the [word] aku, it goes with the [word] betray/twist
salt
which is easier: to say, ‘your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘get up and walk’?
wealthy
because you know that the lord will reward everyone for whatever good he does, whether he is slave or free.
hip
jesus said, "you have now seen him; in fact, he is the one speaking with you."
“go, stand in the temple courts,” he said, “and tell the people all about this new life.”
when we take another step we step down.
remember this: whoever turns a sinner from the error of his way will save him from death and cover over a multitude of sins.
confused.
a notch in wood.
if you have come in from outside (lit. from the ground) and you experience a pain which penetrates [through your body], you have been affected by an evil spirit.
now we know that if the earthly tent we live in is destroyed, we have a building from god, an eternal house in heaven, not built by human hands.
taboo
roost, perch as a bird or chicken
nor are you to be called instructors, for you have one instructor, the messiah.
love never fails. but where there are prophecies, they will cease; where there are tongues, they will be stilled; where there is knowledge, it will pass away.
as john was completing his work, he said: ‘who do you suppose i am? i am not the one you are looking for. but there is one coming after me whose sandals i am not worthy to untie.’
as jesus was sitting on the mount of olives, the disciples came to him privately. “tell us,” they said, “when will this happen, and what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the age?”
when the boil bursts, the pus will be mixed with blood.
it is like ann joy who was seriously ill. we lost hope because she would not live.
so when you are assembled and i am with you in spirit, and the power of our lord jesus is present,
he feels frustrated because he has no more recourse.
but no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth could open the scroll or even look inside it.
pinch each other
cut up into small pieces
they are senseless, faithless, heartless, ruthless.
all the believers were one in heart and mind. no one claimed that any of their possessions was their own, but they shared everything they had.
philip went down to a city in samaria and proclaimed the messiah there.
romp together
horn (made from cow or carabao horn)
to go after and catch
as he was going into a village, ten men who had leprosy met him. they stood at a distance
come to an end
don't act inappropriately over at someone's house
blister from friction
we are not accustomed to those kinds of fish [lit. viand]. we are accustomed to having no [means of catching] fish.
david said about him: ‘i saw the lord always before me. because he is at my right hand, i will not be shaken.
therefore this generation will be held responsible for the blood of all the prophets that has been shed since the beginning of the world,
kind of tree with red sap resembling blood
the grace of the lord jesus be with god's people. amen.
let no one in the field go back to get their cloak.
at that very time jesus cured many who had diseases, sicknesses and evil spirits, and gave sight to many who were blind.
water trough or sluice
his/her emotions are easily upset.
teach slaves to be subject to their masters in everything, to try to please them, not to talk back to them,
sometimes you were publicly exposed to insult and persecution; at other times you stood side by side with those who were so treated.
but i tell you, do not resist an evil person. if anyone slaps you on the right cheek, turn to them the other cheek also.
sugar
shellfish like a small clam
and he directed the people to sit down on the grass. taking the five loaves and the two fish and looking up to heaven, he gave thanks and broke the loaves. then he gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the people.
who of you by worrying can add a single hour to his life ?
to make a channel or ditch.
with a loud cry, jesus breathed his last.
sound of many people stepping on flooring
he must hold firmly to the trustworthy message as it has been taught, so that he can encourage others by sound doctrine and refute those who oppose it.
glass
kind of white rice.
an accusation
monkey
big
when these things begin to take place, stand up and lift up your heads, because your redemption is drawing near."
two or more people shoot with arrows or plunge spears into a pig or chicken to insure its deaths.
to bring to life; resuscitate
flower
then the sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to him with a question.
you are looking only on the surface of things. if anyone is confident that he belongs to christ, he should consider again that we belong to christ just as much as he
take something. choose that which you are hungry for.
you hypocrites! isaiah was right when he prophesied about you:
stay together
entire hand, up to the wrist
i'm after the house that jeremy made but i don't yet have anything with which to pay.
then jesus said to them, “the son of man is lord of the sabbath.”
at this the jews began to grumble about him because he said, "i am the bread that came down from heaven."
when all the people were being baptized, jesus was baptized too. and as he was praying, heaven was opened
we’ll feed it to the chickens.
how much more, then, will the blood of christ, who through the eternal spirit offered himself unblemished to god, cleanse our consciences from acts that lead to death, so that we may serve the living god!
hex, as a sickness or death brought on by use of a fetish or witchcraft
while peter was still speaking these words, the holy spirit came on all who heard the message.
at harvest time he sent a servant to the tenants so they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. but the tenants beat him and sent him away empty-handed.
then he called the crowd to him along with his disciples and said: "if anyone would come after me, he must deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.
grow fast
the coffin is being lowered
shoulder blade.
dirty teeth.
they see if our stewardship of the rice is good.
whoever has ears, let them hear.”
don't grab and pull on my dress because it will tear.
“when he comes, he will prove the world to be in the wrong about sin and righteousness and judgment:”
likewise the tongue is a small part of the body, but it makes great boasts. consider what a great forest is set on fire by a small spark.
then i heard a loud voice in heaven say: “now have come the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our god, and the authority of his messiah. for the accuser of our brothers and sisters, who accuses them before our god day and night, has been hurled down.
to throw a hoop.
we just suck on candy so that it will be slow to dissolve.
dawn
when a person defecates, the fecal material passes through the anus.
not quite
unripe; young, as of corn; immature.
"make level paths for your feet," so that the lame may not be disabled, but rather healed.
andrew, simon peter’s brother, was one of the two who heard what john had said and who had followed jesus.
for to which of the angels did god ever say, “you are my son; today i have become your father”? or again, “i will be his father, and he will be my son”?
shaman ceremony
attack
an empty flour sack.
make it your ambition to lead a quiet life, to mind your own business and to work with your hands, just as we told you,
we’ll be burned by the steam.
leaf out
admonishing word to a coughing child
then the governor’s soldiers took jesus into the praetorium and gathered the whole company of soldiers around him.
how can you be so confident!
if i fuel a fire with wood and the fire is hot/strong, it has ignited and has formed hot coals.
for he "has put everything under his feet." now when it says that "everything" has been put under him, it is clear that this does not include god himself, who put everything under christ.
but the time will come when the bridegroom will be taken from them, and on that day they will fast.
very hard (as wood)
(for the fruit of the light consists in all goodness, righteousness and truth)
there are people who cannot be trusted because they pilfer (lit pick up) my things.
kind of tree.
hurry and fetch water because it will soon rain.
again peter denied it, and at that moment a rooster began to crow.
one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues came and said to me, "come, i will show you the bride, the wife of the lamb."
what do you think? there was a man who had two sons. he went to the first and said, ‘son, go and work today in the vineyard.’
put away
weeds.
when someone pounds rice, many rice [grains] fly out of the mortar as a result of our striking [them with the pestle].
sky
if i send them home hungry, they will collapse on the way, because some of them have come a long distance."
uneven
the corn will be skinny. the ears will be small.
“the spirit of truth. the world cannot accept him, because it neither sees him nor knows him. but you know him, for he lives with you and will be in you.”
if anyone is hungry, he should eat at home, so that when you meet together it may not result in judgment. and when i come i will give further directions.
now about spiritual gifts, brothers, i do not want you to be ignorant.
the others won't produce ears.
and i will make every effort to see that after my departure you will always be able to remember these things.
sting
a vine for hair growth
each, individually
asat is of great value to me because he is the one to whom i am able to entrust [with my field work].
you know that the household of stephanas were the first converts in achaia, and they have devoted themselves to the service of the saints. i urge you, brothers,
small girl
side by side
to bark.
not only is this so, but we also boast in god through our lord jesus christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.
foam (on sea, rice, or drinks)
pick out, as an ant from food
to mutter to oneself, similar to mugunmugun but different from a whisper
"this calls for a mind with wisdom. the seven heads are seven hills on which the woman sits.
we are expecting that we have something good.
bear down
to pay up front
but we want to hear what your views are, for we know that people everywhere are talking against this sect."
when i was a child, i talked like a child, i thought like a child, i reasoned like a child. when i became a man, i put childish ways behind me.
the brightness causes it to rain.
when the young man heard this, he went away sad, because he had great wealth.
come out of a hole; be born; burst forth
i, however, avoid scandals because they make trouble. we shouldn't get involved in scandals about other people.
a mother hen, when it is afternoon, gathers her offspring under her wings.
when i was on the beach, i was caught by the wind of a strong whirlwind. dried out plants on the beach were pulled up by the roots and whirled around as the were carried upwards.
then he gave abraham the covenant of circumcision. and abraham became the father of isaac and circumcised him eight days after his birth. later isaac became the father of jacob, and jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs.
this is the verdict: light has come into the world, but people loved darkness instead of light because their deeds were evil.
keeping a close watch on him, they sent spies, who pretended to be honest. they hoped to catch jesus in something he said so that they might hand him over to the power and authority of the governor.
“lord, if it’s you,” peter replied, “tell me to come to you on the water.”
adhesive tape
make fierce
raw, uncooked, unripe.
then the angel said to me, “write this: blessed are those who are invited to the wedding supper of the lamb!” and he added, “these are the true words of god.”
for john the baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘he has a demon.’
gills
wrist
peter replied, “repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of jesus christ for the forgiveness of your sins. and you will receive the gift of the holy spirit.
once, on being asked by the pharisees when the kingdom of god would come, jesus replied, “the coming of the kingdom of god is not something that can be observed,
push the fishhook through to the other side of his thumb.3to penetrate through, as a pain which goes through one's body from one side to another.
"this is how it will be with anyone who stores up things for himself but is not rich toward god."
he is staying with simon the tanner, whose house is by the sea.”
he makes provision to feed the cat.
but whoever does not have them is nearsighted and blind, forgetting that they have been cleansed from their past sins.
[when] there is someone who is getting married, the men ?? will have an engagement feast there at the place where he will be married in order to make an agreement as to when the wedding will be held.
lymph nodes in the neck, armpit, or groin
uncircumcised
the head of a turtle is pulled back and inside its body.
trying to find out the time and circumstances to which the spirit of christ in them was pointing when he predicted the sufferings of christ and the glories that would follow.
in the lord, however, woman is not independent of man, nor is man independent of woman.
if we proceed directly to go home, we won't stop at different places enroute. we will go straight home.
all they asked was that we should continue to remember the poor, the very thing i had been eager to do all along.
he is the image of the invisible god, the firstborn over all creation.
the dove glimpses us.
when he heard this, he became very sad, because he was very wealthy.
resist being cut
they replied, "the lord needs it."
a bala-an is a small bamboo container in which edible water creatures are put.
as for the woman, she spread the flooring apart and that was where the spear passed through which was used to spear her enemy.
venom
nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. there will be earthquakes in various places, and famines. these are the beginning of birth pains.
intestines
some of those present were saying indignantly to one another, "why this waste of perfume?
may god himself, the god of peace, sanctify you through and through. may your whole spirit, soul and body be kept blameless at the coming of our lord jesus christ.
"have faith in god," jesus answered.
lose, be lost
when a bamboo water pole tips over, the water spills but it is slow to go out because the mouth is narrow.
when a child walks as he is playing and lifts his foot above his waist, his legs are also spread apart.
both were running, but the other disciple outran peter and reached the tomb first.
getting along with each other; companionship or interpersonal relationships
the spirit gives life; the flesh counts for nothing. the words i have spoken to you are spirit and they are life.
and so from this one man, and he as good as dead, came descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and as countless as the sand on the seashore.
and the lord's servant must not quarrel; instead, he must be kind to everyone, able to teach, not resentful.
so he got up, took the child and his mother and went to the land of israel.
but others said, "these are not the sayings of a man possessed by a demon. can a demon open the eyes of the blind?"
when the dragon saw that he had been hurled to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child.
pilate was surprised to hear that he was already dead. summoning the centurion, he asked him if jesus had already died.
when jesus said this, one of the officials nearby struck him in the face. "is this the way you answer the high priest?" he demanded.
that which took them so long to return was because they did not have any fare with which to return home.
a cap for a roof made of grass, it will soon deteriorate.
the children are being taught so that they will have skills.
stand ears of corn along the rim of a basket to keep it from falling
even though it is small [it’s ok]
the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness has not overcome it.
the words “it was credited to him” were written not for him alone,
i will give you the whole amount of this my money which is just one hundred [pesos] left.
i also want the women to dress modestly, with decency and propriety, adorning themselves, not with elaborate hairstyles or gold or pearls or expensive clothes,
knotty (with many joints/knots)
not that i am looking for a gift, but i am looking for what may be credited to your account.
smart
there he was transfigured before them. his face shone like the sun, and his clothes became as white as the light.
and this is love: that we walk in obedience to his commands. as you have heard from the beginning, his command is that you walk in love.
jesus said, “you believe because i told you i saw you under the fig tree. you will see greater things than that.”
exalted to the right hand of god, he has received from the father the promised holy spirit and has poured out what you now see and hear.
younger-older relationship
in lystra there sat a man who was lame. he had been that way from birth and had never walked.
but from now on, the son of man will be seated at the right hand of the mighty god."
and to knowledge, self-control; and to self-control, perseverance; and to perseverance, godliness;
the sun is setting when it goes past the mountain as it is disappearing over the horizon.
lame, crippled in the legs
even if it is not our relative (lit. companion) who has died, if we participate in weeping [with the others], someone else will comfort us by saying, “it is really quite natural that we die.”
something used as a remedy.
toy or game
two or more people shoot with arrows or plunge spears into a pig or chicken to insure its deaths.
young.
signify
if only for this life we have hope in christ, we are to be pitied more than all men.
when we cut down vines for a useful purpose, we cut off the stalks lit. body of the rattan and we take them.
crow.
those whom we call as slaves are the ones who are always made to work. they have a hard time.
baguntaas is the halfway point between valencia and nasuli.
cuddly, as a baby
simon peter asked him, "lord, where are you going?" jesus replied, "where i am going, you cannot follow now, but you will follow later."
at daybreak the council of the elders of the people, both the chief priests and teachers of the law, met together, and jesus was led before them.
they were being crushed because it was a narrow place.
when [the swamp] is cut, it will dry up and the rice will be good because it will develop well.
test
if you know that he is righteous, you know that everyone who does what is right has been born of him.
when we aim a gun at a bird, and when we have sighted it, we shoot the air gun and then the bird is hit.
if a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
barely
throw a tantrum (adult woman)
and levi got up, left everything and followed him.
whatever you do, work at it with all your heart, as working for the lord, not for men,
before i burn it, i pile up the wood.
continuous crying (child)
if you have come in from outside (lit. from the ground) and you experience a pain which penetrates [through your body], you have been affected by an evil spirit.
then one of the elders said to me, "do not weep! see, the lion of the tribe of judah, the root of david, has triumphed. he is able to open the scroll and its seven seals."
when the trigger of the pig trap is released, a pig which has been caught.
and those he predestined, he also called; those he called, he also justified; those he justified, he also glorified.
miss someone
suffer injury or accident
i’ll let lubia scrape this from the pot.
to humble one's self
heaven and earth adjacent to each other.
following
so they stirred up the people and the elders and the teachers of the law. they seized stephen and brought him before the sanhedrin.
meaning sense
"teacher," they asked, "when will these things happen? and what will be the sign that they are about to take place?"
a man ought not to cover his head, since he is the image and glory of god; but woman is the glory of man.
jesus said, "if you were blind, you would not be guilty of sin; but now that you claim you can see, your guilt remains.
the only way the word is used is if we have a companion whom [we] invite to go bathing with us and i say, "just bring the fragrant soap".
when john, who was in prison, heard about the deeds of the messiah, he sent his disciples
save
but god demonstrates his own love for us in this: while we were still sinners, christ died for us.
a kind of wild chicken.
we want to avoid any criticism of the way we administer this liberal gift.
and when he finds it, he joyfully puts it on his shoulders
to one's left
whispered softly when hunting wild chickens so that they don't fly away
for we are members of his body.
to be sprawled out on the ground (lifeless or unconscious)
the men traveling with saul stood there speechless; they heard the sound but did not see anyone.
for those who exalt themselves will be humbled, and those who humble themselves will be exalted.
non-intentive mode prefix of an action or event which is abilitative, non-intentional
will fail to receive many times as much in this age, and in the age to come eternal life.”
last night an angel of the god whose i am and whom i serve stood beside me
but when the jews in thessalonica learned that paul was preaching the word of god at berea, some of them went there too, agitating the crowds and stirring them up.
to ignore, refuse to pay attention to
when the wine was gone, jesus’ mother said to him, “they have no more wine.”
the hearth frame was burned.
bolo handle.
small red chili peppers
the younger one said to his father, 'father, give me my share of the estate.' so he divided his property between them.
blind pharisee! first clean the inside of the cup and dish, and then the outside also will be clean.
knot (thread/rope)
uncle was thirsty (lit. dry) after walking far. he said, “i would like to drink [something] please if maybe you have some water, usì.”
there were people who knew me who stopped over at my house and asked for [something] to drink.
we fit the lid on the shaft  of the ballpen.
but i tell you that it will be more bearable for sodom on the day of judgment than for you.”
squeeze
so he reasoned in the synagogue with both jews and god-fearing greeks, as well as in the marketplace day by day with those who happened to be there.
give birth in the immediate future or past (same day)
jesus is ‘the stone you builders rejected, which has become the cornerstone.’  salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to mankind by which we must be saved.”
phase of the moon
limp
there were many people who wore g-strings at that time long ago.
swollen bruise on the forehead.
our foot is lifted up as we take a step and then we step down.
jesus turned and saw her. “take heart, daughter,” he said, “your faith has healed you.” and the woman was healed from that moment.
the children are throwing corncobs at each other.
wait a minute
one of three original ata siblings who performed miracles.
dare or have courage to do something
they must first be tested; and then if there is nothing against them, let them serve as deacons.
this is a profound mystery--but i am talking about christ and the church.
if i had not come and spoken to them, they would not be guilty of sin. now, however, they have no excuse for their sin.
the teacher puts up with the child who is always asking questions.
attend church
but if an unbeliever or someone who does not understand comes in while everybody is prophesying, he will be convinced by all that he is a sinner and will be judged by all,
is christ divided? was paul crucified for you? were you baptized into the name of paul?
some men brought to him a paralyzed man, lying on a mat. when jesus saw their faith, he said to the man, “take heart, son; your sins are forgiven.”
eggbeater
and said, 'do not be afraid, paul. you must stand trial before caesar; and god has graciously given you the lives of all who sail with you.'
like
to philemon our dear friend and fellow worker, to apphia our sister, to archippus our fellow soldier and to the church that meets in your home:
we proclaim him, admonishing and teaching everyone with all wisdom, so that we may present everyone perfect in christ.
when jesus said this, one of the officials nearby struck him in the face. "is this the way you answer the high priest?" he demanded.
the son of cainan, the son of arphaxad, the son of shem, the son of noah, the son of lamech,
nudge
give birth to a mixed breed
until i make your enemies a footstool for your feet." '
to keep me from becoming conceited because of these surpassingly great revelations, there was given me a thorn in my flesh, a messenger of satan, to torment me.
but we want to hear what your views are, for we know that people everywhere are talking against this sect."
the master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he is not aware of. he will cut him to pieces and assign him a place with the unbelievers.
poison an enemy
something to swim in; bathing suit
one's gallbladder is good if there is nothing to upset him.
day before yesterday.
even though
noise when walking on bamboo floor
he appointed twelve--designating them apostles --that they might be with him and that he might send them out to preach and to have authority to drive out demons.
if he cries to go along, he wants to go with his mother.
remember the height from which you have fallen! repent and do the things you did at first. if you do not repent, i will come to you and remove your lampstand from its place.
there is, there are
jesus replied, “foxes have dens and birds have nests, but the son of man has no place to lay his head.”
to be thrown at
footprint, handprint, fingerprint, or impression
they left the room, and while talking with one another, they said, "this man is not doing anything that deserves death or imprisonment."
a jar of wine vinegar was there, so they soaked a sponge in it, put the sponge on a stalk of the hyssop plant, and lifted it to jesus' lips.
a furious squall came up, and the waves broke over the boat, so that it was nearly swamped.
this righteousness is given through faith in jesus christ to all who believe. there is no difference between jew and gentile,
relate
simon peter answered, “you are the messiah, the son of the living god.”
for the man who was miraculously healed was over forty years old.
to bulge and crack the soil as by sweet potatoes near the surface of the ground
latch onto
his acquaintance subtracted three hundred pesos. the money which arrived,  was only two hundred [pesos].
two men will be in the field; one will be taken and the other left.
each man should give what he has decided in his heart to give, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for god loves a cheerful giver.
the airplane is able to fly because it has been repaired.
woe to you, teachers of the law and pharisees, you hypocrites! you are like whitewashed tombs, which look beautiful on the outside but on the inside are full of the bones of the dead and everything unclean.
rattan
while the women were on their way, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests everything that had happened.
but no man can tame the tongue. it is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.
wrap rice in a banana leaf
a damolugan lizard is roasted and fed to a child as a remedy for that which is making him/her thin.
radiate
but make up your mind not to worry beforehand how you will defend yourselves.
“i too was convinced that i ought to do all that was possible to oppose the name of jesus of nazareth.
god thus confirming our testimony about christ among you.
to slice rattan very small
blink
we test a person to see if his conduct is good.patogkaran nu.
when tempted, no one should say, "god is tempting me." for god cannot be tempted by evil, nor does he tempt anyone;
in the past, he let all nations go their own way.
and a man with a shriveled hand was there. looking for a reason to bring charges against jesus, they asked him, “is it lawful to heal on the sabbath?”
call
lie beside, next to
but jesus, knowing their evil intent, said, “you hypocrites, why are you trying to trap me?
walk around the mat.
the spirits of prophets are subject to the control of prophets.
regarding if we had a friend with whom we had a good relationship but if [someone sings] his song but he is no longer on earth, you will be caused to think about him when you hear that song [which he used to sing] when he was still alive.
the person who has finished harvesting, he removes the old plants as he weeds.
a man’s enemies will be the members of his own household.’
he who does what is sinful is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the beginning. the reason the son of god appeared was to destroy the devil's work.
female; woman; unmarried woman
do not be carried away by all kinds of strange teachings. it is good for our hearts to be strengthened by grace, not by eating ceremonial foods, which is of no benefit to those who do so.
hang by one's hands or feet
then jesus answered, "will you really lay down your life for me? i tell you the truth, before the rooster crows, you will disown me three times!
“and if i go and prepare a place for you, i will come back and take you to be with me that you also may be where i am.”
will he thank the servant because he did what he was told to do?
large crowds from galilee, the decapolis, jerusalem, judea and the region across the jordan followed him.
i plan to do so when i go to spain. i hope to visit you while passing through and to have you assist me on my journey there, after i have enjoyed your company for a while.
if my child avails himself/herself of an opportunity to eat at someone else's house, i will scold him/her.
scissors; to cut with scissors
the tree by the water is leaning over. its tip is upside down.
carry in mouth, as an animal.
the feathery chicken discarded her young when she was about to lay again.
the commander came up and arrested him and ordered him to be bound with two chains. then he asked who he was and what he had done.
therefore judge nothing before the appointed time; wait until the lord comes. he will bring to light what is hidden in darkness and will expose the motives of the heart. at that time each will receive their praise from god.
paul went down, threw himself on the young man and put his arms around him. “don’t be alarmed,” he said. “he’s alive!”
jesus replied, “you may go. your son will live.” the man took jesus at his word and departed.
eat heartily so that you will soon become well from your illness.
coming up to them at that very moment, she gave thanks to god and spoke about the child to all who were looking forward to the redemption of jerusalem.
spokesperson or representative of a higher leader
soon the whole city was in an uproar. the people seized gaius and aristarchus, paul's traveling companions from macedonia, and rushed as one man into the theater.
it is shameful even to mention what the disobedient do in secret.
to try to arouse someone, as a person who is unconscious.
we doubt what the radio said.
term of address to an unmarried man, used by women and between men as a sign of respect.
for it is god who works in you to will and to act according to his good purpose.
at that time they had a well-known prisoner whose name was jesus barabbas.
crunchy sound when eating something crisp
for from him and through him and to him are all things. to him be the glory forever! amen.
but he who disowns me before men will be disowned before the angels of god.
to be difficult
some people rarely blink their eyes.
as for the present-day people who have come later, there is a custom to have an outhouse for defecating and so that is the only place people will go to to defecate.
since you are demanding proof that christ is speaking through me. he is not weak in dealing with you, but is powerful among you.
and the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of god and from his power, and no one could enter the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed.
a kind of black rice.
do your best to get here before winter. eubulus greets you, and so do pudens, linus, claudia and all the brothers.
a woman came to him with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume, which she poured on his head as he was reclining at the table.
the very top of the head
“you are the light of the world. a town built on a hill cannot be hidden.
in the same way the men also abandoned natural relations with women and were inflamed with lust for one another. men committed shameful acts with other men, and received in themselves the due penalty for their error.
but even the archangel michael, when he was disputing with the devil about the body of moses, did not dare to bring a slanderous accusation against him, but said, "the lord rebuke you!"
cut off
we bumped heads.
for the one whom god has sent speaks the words of god, for god gives the spirit without limit.
first
get rid of all bitterness, rage and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice.
someone took away a half portion of my land. a half portion is a half.
if anyone else thinks he has reasons to put confidence in the flesh, i have more: circumcised on the eighth day, of the people of israel, of the tribe of benjamin, a hebrew of hebrews; in regard to the law, a pharisee;
for our light and momentary troubles are achieving for us an eternal glory that far outweighs them all.
perhaps i will stay with you for a while, or even spend the winter, so that you can help me on my journey, wherever i go.
when everything had been arranged like this, the priests entered regularly into the outer room to carry on their ministry.
suffering.
touching each other
to enfold or wrap in leaves or corn husks for steaming.
and not only by his coming but also by the comfort you had given him. he told us about your longing for me, your deep sorrow, your ardent concern for me, so that my joy was greater than ever.
so the evil spirits won’t haunt us.
so we say with confidence, "the lord is my helper; i will not be afraid. what can man do to me?"
the horse which is being treated, with something to make him fierce, he becomes like the creatures which are likewise fierce.
when we are intensely thirsty, we need to drink some water.
that’s not a lie.
if anybody thinks he is a prophet or spiritually gifted, let him acknowledge that what i am writing to you is the lord's command.
if i am to go on living in the body, this will mean fruitful labor for me. yet what shall i choose? i do not know! i am torn between the two: i desire to depart and be with christ, which is better by far; but it is more necessary for you that i remain in the body.
the blanket is convenient for body lice because it’s fuzzy.
to work hard
and they asked each other, "who will roll the stone away from the entrance of the tomb?" but when they looked up, they saw that the stone, which was very large, had been rolled away.
but i tell you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you,
tiny pollywog
for a while
hush up a crying baby at night.
peter said to him, "we have left everything to follow you!"
do not repay evil with evil or insult with insult. on the contrary, repay evil with blessing, because to this you were called so that you may inherit a blessing.
rolling rushing water, current
proclaim; brag; boast; show off
when some of those standing there heard this, they said, “he’s calling elijah.”
disease which makes dogs crazy (rabies)
plant with a stick
i am checking [to see] whether that which i i have heard is true.
we have much to say about this, but it is hard to make it clear to you because you no longer try to understand.
"a new command i give you: love one another. as i have loved you, so you must love one another.
intersect
then i looked, and there before me was the lamb, standing on mount zion, and with him 144,000 who had his name and his father's name written on their foreheads.
labor of childbirth
jesus answered, “it is written: ‘man shall not live on bread alone, but on every word that comes from the mouth of god.’”
when they arrived at salamis, they proclaimed the word of god in the jewish synagogues. john was with them as their helper.
in our place, it is necessary that we be well-behaved so that we won't be discredited.
embers of fire
but you do not believe because you are not my sheep.
an elder must be blameless, faithful to his wife, a man whose children believe and are not open to the charge of being wild and disobedient.
very much
repeatedly
to slurp; sip or drink something noisily, such as soup.
one of the heads of the beast seemed to have had a fatal wound, but the fatal wound had been healed. the whole world was astonished and followed the beast.
the albino  antabun heron has no mixture of design because it is completely white.
we can’t recognize him if he’s far away.
to be struck, as by light.
but as surely as god is faithful, our message to you is not "yes" and "no."
monday
the son of man will send out his angels, and they will weed out of his kingdom everything that causes sin and all who do evil.
god also testified to it by signs, wonders and various miracles, and by gifts of the holy spirit distributed according to his will.
altogether there were 276 of us on board.
a covering, such as a blanket or mat
water which does not flow has been dammed up.
dip
the sap of the dugu-an tree stains
but if they cannot control themselves, they should marry, for it is better to marry than to burn with passion.
"this is the covenant i will make with them after that time, says the lord. i will put my laws in their hearts, and i will write them on their minds."
abandon
when the head of a turtle retracts inside its shell, it moves backwards and goes inside its shell.
bathe someone
paul wanted to appear before the crowd, but the disciples would not let him.
terrified person
jesus answered, “those who have had a bath need only to wash their feet; their whole body is clean. and you are clean, though not every one of you.”
bend
long seed bead
they are the kind who worm their way into homes and gain control over gullible women, who are loaded down with sins and are swayed by all kinds of evil desires,
there is no one to whom he shows favoritism; [he treats] everyone equally. there is no one whom he belittles.
return.
as for the fruit of the red pepper, it is a big help if we have a corn field which has a tasikan blight/disease.
some fell on rocky places, where it did not have much soil. it sprang up quickly, because the soil was shallow.
if some of the branches have been broken off, and you, though a wild olive shoot, have been grafted in among the others and now share in the nourishing sap from the olive root,
old betelnut, dried up
outrigger of a canoe
do not be yoked together with unbelievers. for what do righteousness and wickedness have in common? or what fellowship can light have with darkness?
“which of the two do you want me to release to you?” asked the governor. “barabbas,” they answered.
if one of our companions has a debt which [he/she] doesn't pay, we jog his/her memory by asking.
dig
ear discharge (runny smell)
shrewd
lamp soot
name of a mountain near mansalinao
“they will put you out of the synagogue; in fact, the time is coming when anyone who kills you will think they are offering a service to god.”
a priest happened to be going down the same road, and when he saw the man, he passed by on the other side.
a shelter will be built on the raft.
to fold leaves of certain rattan and palm leaves when preparing leaves for roofing so that they all hang in the same direction
as for a cock, what is used as a treatment is the hair of a weasel which is used to smoke the chicken so that it will fight fiercely.
as for father's house, it is struck by the light of the sun. when it rises in the morning, it is very much inadvertently struck by the rays of the sun.
knowledge
when we cut down bamboo, we sharpen it because we will make into a bamboo spear.
release a horse into pasture to choose what it will eat
kind of sugarcane
if we have many animals, our living situation becomes easier because we won't experience hardship.
you are my master/leader; you are my second leader.”
the scripture foresaw that god would justify the gentiles by faith, and announced the gospel in advance to abraham: "all nations will be blessed through you."
but the other criminal rebuked him. "don't you fear god," he said, "since you are under the same sentence?
when we are nauseated, we spit up our saliva, and if we have food we have eaten, then it will be vomited. if we are continually nauseated, we will repeatedly vomit up that which we have eaten.
get up
we do, however, speak a message of wisdom among the mature, but not the wisdom of this age or of the rulers of this age, who are coming to nothing.
the person who is strong-willed, he resists any kind of advice.
what business is it of mine to judge those outside the church? are you not to judge those inside? god will judge those outside. "expel the wicked man from among you."
give someone the willies
secure
boil over
but jesus said to them, "i have shown you many great miracles from the father. for which of these do you stone me?"
at that time some pharisees came to jesus and said to him, "leave this place and go somewhere else. herod wants to kill you."
but they were kept from recognizing him.
at the end of harvesting sweet potatoes, when the sweet potatoes are washed in the river/creek (lit. water), we cut off the roots at the tips
to look
i saw heaven standing open and there before me was a white horse, whose rider is called faithful and true. with justice he judges and wages war.
swift, fast
for even his own brothers did not believe in him.
the king said to the girl, "ask me for anything you want, and i'll give it to you." and he promised her with an oath, "whatever you ask i will give you, up to half my kingdom."
pointed or having tapering sides, such as a mountain peak or pencil tip
jesus said to him, “away from me, satan! for it is written: ‘worship the lord your god, and serve him only.’”
estimate the width.
to be closed (as a flower), or not yet open
but i will punish the nation they serve as slaves,’ god said, ‘and afterward they will come out of that country and worship me in this place.’
i was personally unknown to the churches of judea that are in christ.
request or beg for something from someone
but what does it say? “the word is near you; it is in your mouth and in your heart,” that is, the message concerning faith that we proclaim:
to be afraid
known, yet regarded as unknown; dying, and yet we live on; beaten, and yet not killed;
and the child grew and became strong in spirit; and he lived in the wilderness until he appeared publicly to israel.
to fish by leaving the hook and bait in water overnight
give me some of that betelnut you’re chewing.
a reddish color nocturnal animal similar to a sloth
dialect variant of bonok
it’s bad luck to have a dog that won’t hunt.
the sea is rising.
to beat something with one drumstick (on a hanging gong)
"simon, simon, satan has asked to sift you as wheat.
and he will go on before the lord, in the spirit and power of elijah, to turn the hearts of the parents to their children and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous—to make ready a people prepared for the lord.”
he replied, "blessed rather are those who hear the word of god and obey it."
cut the edge of a log
but you, man of god, flee from all this, and pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, endurance and gentleness.
i served the lord with great humility and with tears and in the midst of severe testing by the plots of my jewish opponents.
to habitually visit other homes so that one becomes a bother
but many who heard the message believed; so the number of men who believed grew to about five thousand.
so you testify that you approve of what your forefathers did; they killed the prophets, and you build their tombs.
‘even the dust of your town that sticks to our feet we wipe off against you. yet be sure of this: the kingdom of god has come near.’
this is the disciple who testifies to these things and who wrote them down. we know that his testimony is true.
so that by god's will i may come to you with joy and together with you be refreshed.
the twenty-four elders fall down before him who sits on the throne, and worship him who lives for ever and ever. they lay their crowns before the throne and say:
to press and rub something against another object (e.g., sharpening an instrument).
for i have five brothers. let him warn them, so that they will not also come to this place of torment.’
“i am coming to you now, but i say these things while i am still in the world, so that they may have the full measure of my joy within them.”
to be in the process of eating
return, turn back
we split open the pula palm tree which we have notched and then we see many white grubs which are squirming.
do not offer any part of yourself to sin as an instrument of wickedness, but rather offer yourselves to god as those who have been brought from death to life; and offer every part of yourself to him as an instrument of righteousness.
when jesus entered the synagogue leader’s house and saw the noisy crowd and people playing pipes,
for anyone who eats and drinks without recognizing the body of the lord eats and drinks judgment on himself.
he laid his head on the rock
friendship name (shared by close friends)
take it over there.
but when that servant went out, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred silver coins. he grabbed him and began to choke him. ‘pay back what you owe me!’ he demanded.
no one has ever seen god; but if we love one another, god lives in us and his love is made complete in us.
the host hurried to meet the guest who arrived at his house and he welcomed and gathered information from him as they talked with one another.
top of a shield
intentionally spread
therefore, i declare to you today that i am innocent of the blood of all men.
"i have compassion for these people; they have already been with me three days and have nothing to eat.
yesterday
now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law, so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole world held accountable to god.
overtake and go ahead of
to have been made pregnant by someone not one's spouse
slow-burning
lack
this little chick has sprouted wings.
if the word is just daral, it's meaning is different because we are rushing our companion to do something.
go around
to move in multiple directions while doing something
slice in pieces
we’ll use buanbuan for the payment.
so joseph also went up from the town of nazareth in galilee to judea, to bethlehem the town of david, because he belonged to the house and line of david.
again he asked them, “who is it you want?” “jesus of nazareth,” they said.
a wooden pole fastened between two sturdy trees (part of a pig trap)
when you have seen [each other] you tell [that person] that you will sleep together for a while because you have missed him/her
argue
red suits you.
on the contrary, those parts of the body that seem to be weaker are indispensable,
then agrippa said to paul, “you have permission to speak for yourself.” so paul motioned with his hand and began his defense:
and i have heard recently that they have no children who have lived.  if they frequently give birth, the child just dies.
prey on
do you not know, brothers and sisters—for i am speaking to those who know the law—that the law has authority over someone only as long as that person lives?
wood used in making a hearth frame.
but if you harbor bitter envy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not boast about it or deny the truth.
his followers mocked him so they were changed into trees.
he chose to be mistreated along with the people of god rather than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a short time.
grow up
then make my joy complete by being like-minded, having the same love, being one in spirit and of one mind.
to play a kobbiung
toothpick.
jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and when he found him, he said, "do you believe in the son of man?"
a person who manipulates, she adjusts the child with her hands but just presses gently.
i’ll let the camotes leaf out.
“friends, why are you doing this? we too are only human, like you. we are bringing you good news, telling you to turn from these worthless things to the living god, who made the heavens and the earth and the sea and everything in them.
for john came to you to show you the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes did. and even after you saw this, you did not repent and believe him.
then john’s disciples came and asked him, “how is it that we and the pharisees fast often, but your disciples do not fast?”
talkative
anyone who welcomes him shares in his wicked work.
after herod died, an angel of the lord appeared in a dream to joseph in egypt
mourn for the dead
do not put out the spirit's fire;
look, your house is left to you desolate. i tell you, you will not see me again until you say, 'blessed is he who comes in the name of the lord.' "
for this very reason, make every effort to add to your faith goodness; and to goodness, knowledge;
those two were in agreement with each other
who is it that overcomes the world? only he who believes that jesus is the son of god.
i said, "i don't know anyone who treats or gives an antidote if there is a hex."
the older person will say, "get a chicken to waver to remove your bad luck."
you became imitators of us and of the lord, for you welcomed the message in the midst of severe suffering with the joy given by the holy spirit.
the fin by the fish's ear is what determines the movement of the body of that fish.
i will strike her children dead. then all the churches will know that i am he who searches hearts and minds, and i will repay each of you according to your deeds.
as for a ladder, it has two leaning posts and there are cross-pieces.
as for people, they have eyes when they are born.
ill-mannered woman
last night an angel of the god whose i am and whom i serve stood beside me
to be strong-willed or disobedient.
to develop algae or moss
disintegrate
if our breath is soft, we will cry when we see someone who has been wounded because we pity/have compassion on them.
to be set free or released from captivity
grunt
cry for someone
“you don’t know what you are asking,” jesus said to them. “can you drink the cup i am going to drink?” “we can,” they answered.
throwing his cloak aside, he jumped to his feet and came to jesus.
for the lord will carry out his sentence on earth with speed and finality.”
lose something by misplacing it
as for the person, he felt his house shake when he slashed the python.
if any of you has a dispute with another, dare he take it before the ungodly for judgment instead of before the saints?
the cat leans back and tumbles when it plays with another cat.
use it to swat blowflies.
to those who sold doves he said, “get these out of here! stop turning my father’s house into a market!”
don't you have homes to eat and drink in? or do you despise the church of god and humiliate those who have nothing? what shall i say to you? shall i praise you for this? certainly not!
shake grains
for such men are false apostles, deceitful workmen, masquerading as apostles of christ.
when the other servants saw what had happened, they were outraged and went and told their master everything that had happened.
for physical training is of some value, but godliness has value for all things, holding promise for both the present life and the life to come.
so when peter went up to jerusalem, the circumcised believers criticized him
when the disciples saw this, they were indignant. “why this waste?” they asked.
and we pray this in order that you may live a life worthy of the lord and may please him in every way: bearing fruit in every good work, growing in the knowledge of god,
tip out; pour or dump
alveolar click
to spear
the cat has white hairs.
he replied, “every plant that my heavenly father has not planted will be pulled up by the roots.
the radio is on top of the table.
what i mean is this: one of you says, "i follow paul"; another, "i follow apollos"; another, "i follow cephas "; still another, "i follow christ."
sometimes you were publicly exposed to insult and persecution; at other times you stood side by side with those who were so treated.
seven
sore, encrusted, runny, red eyes (pink eye)
i will chose a wider house if no one is living [
the people long ago would cut a piece of bamboo which was about the size of a pole which was used to measure a diagram of a house in order to establish where the rooms, the porch and the doors will be.
though you have not seen him, you love him; and even though you do not see him now, you believe in him and are filled with an inexpressible and glorious joy,
he replied, "isaiah was right when he prophesied about you hypocrites; as it is written: " 'these people honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me.
“if you do not remain in me, you are like a branch that is thrown away and withers; such branches are picked up, thrown into the fire and burned.”
you will be told when [the grains] have filled out.
that which is called a wall is that which has a roof like a house upon which the roof is resting on it.
they cause [the house/village] to be taken by surprise when they have banded together in mass to attack so that they all can, without exception, kill [everyone].
our agreement in advance was that whoever has stamina to come along, he/she will be chosen.
to find someone at home.
then he turned to his disciples and said privately, “blessed are the eyes that see what you see.
he replied, "i will also ask you a question. tell me,
to rest.
i turned around to see the voice that was speaking to me. and when i turned i saw seven golden lampstands,
the jews said to one another, "where does this man intend to go that we cannot find him? will he go where our people live scattered among the greeks, and teach the greeks?
he told them this parable: "look at the fig tree and all the trees. when they sprout leaves, you can see for yourselves and know that summer is near.
when you have seen [each other] you tell [that person] that you will sleep together for a while because you have missed him/her
early on the first day of the week, while it was still dark, mary magdalene went to the tomb and saw that the stone had been removed from the entrance.
when they came to jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church and the apostles and elders, to whom they reported everything god had done through them.
the mind governed by the flesh is hostile to god; it does not submit to god’s law, nor can it do so.
a kind of bird
then the devil took him to the holy city and had him stand on the highest point of the temple.
after jesus had sent the crowd away, he got into the boat and went to the vicinity of magadan.
once when jesus was praying in private and his disciples were with him, he asked them, “who do the crowds say i am?”
he jumped to his feet and began to walk. then he went with them into the temple courts, walking and jumping, and praising god.
the leaves called kunakun are fed into the fire as a treatment for bugs.
“you know the way to the place where i am going.”
why are you staring? do you expect to snap off a wart?
as for filipinos, it is their custom to noisily slurp their soup.
want
point towards
sleeplessness; insomnia
whenever the living creatures give glory, honor and thanks to him who sits on the throne and who lives for ever and ever,
baptize
and the twenty-four elders, who were seated on their thrones before god, fell on their faces and worshiped god,
for he knew it was out of self-interest that they had handed jesus over to him.
as soon as i send artemas or tychicus to you, do your best to come to me at nicopolis, because i have decided to winter there.
if we are careful about our conduct, our lives will be orderly.
now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian.
long bamboo, whether growing or as water poles
"i am not insane, most excellent festus," paul replied. "what i am saying is true and reasonable.
we are confident, i say, and would prefer to be away from the body and at home with the lord.
"what do you want me to do for you?" he asked.
as for the liboganon river, the cane is thick there in the flad area and its body is hard.
lance the boil so [the pus] will escape.
his emotions (lit breath) were disturbed by those who were just making [false] accusations. we were taken by surprise because we had not been asked [about it].
a large amount of something sliced and set out to dry
and why do you worry about clothes? see how the flowers of the field grow. they do not labor or spin.
meaning sense
after jesus had said this, he went on ahead, going up to jerusalem.
snap in two
green tobacco (salingsing)
bridge
when jesus had again crossed over by boat to the other side of the lake, a large crowd gathered around him while he was by the lake.
to have or cause someone else to do something
if two people are going downriver [by raft/canoe], and if one gets ahead of the other and  there is one river bend distance between them, he will pursue [the other one] and then he will catch up
to stare
and to the disciple, "here is your mother." from that time on, this disciple took her into his home.
but when you are invited, take the lowest place, so that when your host comes, he will say to you, 'friend, move up to a better place.' then you will be honored in the presence of all your fellow guests.
rather, clothe yourselves with the lord jesus christ, and do not think about how to gratify the desires of the sinful nature.
now to the one who works, wages are not credited as a gift but as an obligation.
someone who is famous, well-known.
while he was still on the way, his servants met him with the news that his boy was living.
but i will punish the nation they serve as slaves,’ god said, ‘and afterward they will come out of that country and worship me in this place.’
his disciples asked him, “rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?”
uvula
therefore, dear friends, since you already know this, be on your guard so that you may not be carried away by the error of lawless men and fall from your secure position.
in the days of abiathar the high priest, he entered the house of god and ate the consecrated bread, which is lawful only for priests to eat. and he also gave some to his companions."
ram the father of amminadab, amminadab the father of nahshon, nahshon the father of salmon,
fly up and over the earth
chew on a bone
they went to a place called gethsemane, and jesus said to his disciples, "sit here while i pray."
place close together
for as jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of a huge fish, so the son of man will be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
no one who wants to become a public figure acts in secret. since you are doing these things, show yourself to the world."
smoke out bees
“i replied, ‘surely not, lord! nothing impure or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’
then should not this woman, a daughter of abraham, whom satan has kept bound for eighteen long years, be 1541 set free on the sabbath day from what bound her?"
because of the increase of wickedness, the love of most will grow cold,
i am no longer worthy to be called your son; make me like one of your hired men.
ravelling, as from material or thread unwound from a spool
greet one another with a holy kiss.
to unfold, as a letter
after they prayed, the place where they were meeting was shaken. and they were all filled with the holy spirit and spoke the word of god boldly.
so pilate asked jesus, "are you the king of the jews?" "yes, it is as you say," jesus replied.
calf of leg
to spread on
while talking with him, peter went inside and found a large gathering of people.
from the time that my child fell, she was moaning.  she said, “my whole body hurts.”
another angel, who had a golden censer, came and stood at the altar. he was given much incense to offer, with the prayers of all god’s people, on the golden altar in front of the throne.
when he had led them out to the vicinity of bethany, he lifted up his hands and blessed them.
sabina and pitikanon ran away together.
my soul rolled up [the mat] and packed it in the basket.
scratch with claws
there was something i didnt understand and so i asked what the meaning was.
be satisfied
holding on to faith and a good conscience, which some have rejected and so have suffered shipwreck with regard to the faith.
uncle's pain penetrates from his chest to his back
and, once made perfect, he became the source of eternal salvation for all who obey him
did not the christ have to suffer these things and then enter his glory?"
suddenly an angel of the lord appeared and a light shone in the cell. he struck peter on the side and woke him up. “quick, get up!” he said, and the chains fell off peter’s wrists.
therefore, my dear brothers, stand firm. let nothing move you. always give yourselves fully to the work of the lord, because you know that your labor in the lord is not in vain.
"then he said, 'this is what i'll do. i will tear down my barns and build bigger ones, and there i will store all my grain and my goods.
as for the unmarried men and the unmarried women, if there is a necklace or a bracelet of a leg band which they covet, they will be quick to ask for it.
the pharisees challenged him, “here you are, appearing as your own witness; your testimony is not valid.”
which of the two did what his father wanted?” “the first,” they answered. jesus said to them, “truly i tell you, the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering the kingdom of god ahead of you.
some of the disciples from caesarea accompanied us and brought us to the home of mnason, where we were to stay. he was a man from cyprus and one of the early disciples.
but concerning israel he says, “all day long i have held out my hands to a disobedient and obstinate people.”
no discipline seems pleasant at the time, but painful. later on, however, it produces a harvest of righteousness and peace for those who have been trained by it.
make a walking stick of that tree.
pilate said, "take him yourselves and judge him by your own law."
now we are separated .  we won't see each other.
the people who digs sweet potatoes, will dump the sweet potatoes into the water because they will wash them first.
pinch
small fish
go outside
to be alive
woven abaca trousers or blanket
you be the ones [to talk] now.
won’t he rather say, ‘prepare my supper, get yourself ready and wait on me while i eat and drink; after that you may eat and drink’?
they brought to the pharisees the man who had been blind.
set it out of the way here.
when the proconsul saw what had happened, he believed, for he was amazed at the teaching about the lord.
sister
i turned around to see the voice that was speaking to me. and when i turned i saw seven golden lampstands,
and the peace of god, which transcends all understanding, will guard your hearts and your minds in christ jesus.
shout in anger at someone.
at that time herod the tetrarch heard the reports about jesus,
as they approached the village to which they were going, jesus acted as if he were going farther.
put [your tobacco] behind your ear.
opening or doorway (not an entry into the house); to open the mouth.
the leaders are having a discussion about whether there will be requests for reimbursement of a brideprice.
airborne dust
therefore anyone who sets aside one of the least of these commands and teaches others accordingly will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever practices and teaches these commands will be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
participant.
he ordered the centurion to keep paul under guard but to give him some freedom and permit his friends to take care of his needs.
to go the shortest route; short cut
he is not the god of the dead, but of the living. you are badly mistaken!"
friend
they completely cut down all of the bamboo for weaving which i had planted without letting it be known by a request. that conduct of theirs usurped the rights of their companion.
bag of waters
when they had carried out all that was written about him, they took him down from the cross and laid him in a tomb.
again he stooped down and wrote on the ground.
the master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he is not aware of.
venom
whether it is high or short, thick or thin, if it is in the yard and surrounds a house, it is called a fence.
the person who is sneaking up on his enemy walks in a bent over position.
and do not swear by your head, for you cannot make even one hair white or black.
to give life (provide sustenance)
because god wanted to make the unchanging nature of his purpose very clear to the heirs of what was promised, he confirmed it with an oath.
all domesticated animals have hips but chickens don't because their legs are attached to (lit. are here on) their sides.
to curse someone
you (singular, oblique pronoun)
camote field
when i was informed of a plot to be carried out against the man, i sent him to you at once. i also ordered his accusers to present to you their case against him.
lung; a kind of fish.
be bothered
to exert strength
on the first day of every week, each one of you should set aside a sum of money in keeping with your income, saving it up, so that when i come no collections will have to be made.
jesus said to her, "your brother will rise again."
peter sent them all out of the room; then he got down on his knees and prayed. turning toward the dead woman, he said, “tabitha, get up.” she opened her eyes, and seeing peter she sat up.
there was a person who lost two hundred pesos of his money. he came to an end of looking for it but didn't find it.
meanwhile, all the people were wailing and mourning for her. “stop wailing,” jesus said. “she is not dead but asleep.”
nothing [bad] will happen to us.
"i will be a father to you, and you will be my sons and daughters, says the lord almighty."
if anyone comes to you and does not bring this teaching, do not take him into your house or welcome him.
a week later his disciples were in the house again, and thomas was with them. though the doors were locked, jesus came and stood among them and said, "peace be with you!"
dwarf
we doubt what the radio said.
none of the rulers of this age understood it, for if they had, they would not have crucified the lord of glory.
stick or bar used in weaving
it’s our fate to have dreams predict misfortune for us.
important
there’s the deer now.
the child who turns over on its stomach, scoots forward as it crawls.
it becomes dark as the moon sets.
point of knife
the man in the loincloth carried that child under his arm.
when i kindled a fire with wood that has been ignited with fire, it was ignited and became coals.
they laughed at him, knowing that she was dead.
uncle's pain penetrates from his chest to his back
struggle against restraint
so he left them and went away once more and prayed the third time, saying the same thing.
burp
they band together to attack a certain house.as for that raiding, there are very many who will come against those enemies of theirs.
lower down
for if the dead are not raised, then christ has not been raised either.
very
they put a purple robe on him, then twisted together a crown of thorns and set it on him.
finally the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, also went inside. he saw and believed.
check out
but in order not to weary you further, i would request that you be kind enough to hear us briefly.
they want to be teachers of the law, but they do not know what they are talking about or what they so confidently affirm.
meaning
so they bound him, led him away and handed him over to pilate the governor.
he ordered the centurion to keep paul under guard but to give him some freedom and permit his friends to take care of his needs.
large
then they heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them, “come up here.” and they went up to heaven in a cloud, while their enemies looked on.
the posts of the house have disintegrated because they are rotten.
and if what was transitory came with glory, how much greater is the glory of that which lasts!
a nod or flick (insect’s head)
then some jews came from antioch and iconium and won the crowd over. they stoned paul and dragged him outside the city, thinking he was dead.
and brought him first to annas, who was the father-in-law of caiaphas, the high priest that year.
we look down at someone without being seen.
and you are of christ, and christ is of god.
but when they realized he was a jew, they all shouted in unison for about two hours: "great is artemis of the ephesians!"
cataracts
but a samaritan, as he traveled, came where the man was; and when he saw him, he took pity on him.
for this reason god sends them a powerful delusion so that they will believe the lie
at that time jesus came from nazareth in galilee and was baptized by john in the jordan.
fast
and out of the smoke locusts came down on the earth and were given power like that of scorpions of the earth.
wait a minute
small container
if the cotton loosens (on the loom), it can’t be done.
test by touching with one’s finger
stab upward with a spear as through the floor
but peter insisted emphatically, "even if i have to die with you, i will never disown you." and all the others said the same.
cut-down cogon grass.
bear in mind that our lord's patience means salvation, just as our dear brother paul also wrote you with the wisdom that god gave him.
many will come in my name, claiming, 'i am he,' and will deceive many.
a game in which a small arch is set in the ground
stubby tail or ears of a dog.
was there ever a prophet your ancestors did not persecute? they even killed those who predicted the coming of the righteous one. and now you have betrayed and murdered him—
nor did they repent of their murders, their magic arts, their sexual immorality or their thefts.
the farmer sows the word.
“land of zebulun and land of naphtali, the way of the sea, beyond the jordan, galilee of the gentiles—
excel
i have come into the world as a light, so that no one who believes in me should stay in darkness.
we did this, not because we do not have the right to such help, but in order to offer ourselves as a model for you to imitate.
immediately her bleeding stopped and she felt in her body that she was freed from her suffering.
and when they climbed into the boat, the wind died down.
fathers, do not embitter your children, or they will become discouraged.
kind of sugarcane
i am sending him to you for the express purpose that you may know about our circumstances and that he may encourage your hearts.
wisdom
wives, submit to your husbands as to the lord.
when it was almost time for the jewish passover, many went up from the country to jerusalem for their ceremonial cleansing before the passover.
"no one lights a lamp and puts it in a place where it will be hidden, or under a bowl. instead he puts it on its stand, so that those who come in may see the light.
the abu-on [bird], isn't so white; [it's color] is mixed.
she has no veins yet.
if this is so, then the lord knows how to rescue godly men from trials and to hold the unrighteous for the day of judgment, while continuing their punishment.
"when you see jerusalem being surrounded by armies, you will know that its desolation is near.
cry at being left behind
give back to her as she has given; pay her back double for what she has done. pour her a double portion from her own cup.
they were pleased to do it, and indeed they owe it to them. for if the gentiles have shared in the jews' spiritual blessings, they owe it to the jews to share with them their material blessings.
thus, by their fruit you will recognize them.
one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and said to me, “come, i will show you the punishment of the great prostitute, who sits by many waters.
and i tell you that you are peter, and on this rock i will build my church, and the gates of hades will not overcome it.
poke
a kind of spear
what then is my reward? just this: that in preaching the gospel i may offer it free of charge, and so not make full use of my rights as a preacher of the gospel.
i was unconscious  for a half hour before i came to.
simon peter, a servant and apostle of jesus christ, to those who through the righteousness of our god and savior jesus christ have received a faith as precious as ours:
and my spirit rejoices in god my savior,
pick up and carry something away
“aeneas,” peter said to him, “jesus christ heals you. get up and roll up your mat.” immediately aeneas got up.
then a teacher of the law came to him and said, “teacher, i will follow you wherever you go.”
for scripture says, “do not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain,” and “the worker deserves his wages.”
when we are gathered together there, because we are looking at each other in front of us, we keep smiling at one another.
pass by
as it is, there are many parts, but one body.
a woman came to him with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume, which she poured on his head as he was reclining at the table.
kind of climbing bamboo used for weaving.
to growl
beaded belt.
her parents were astonished, but he ordered them not to tell anyone what had happened.
as he approached bethphage and bethany at the hill called the mount of olives, he sent two of his disciples, saying to them,
follow after someone because of being worried about their welfare.
red or reddish hues (pink, brown, orange)
when we die, our possessions are simply left behind and cannot be taken where we will be after we die.
the next day jesus decided to leave for galilee. finding philip, he said to him, “follow me.”
"simon, simon, satan has asked to sift you as wheat.
to become flavorful
to press and rub something against another object (e.g., sharpening an instrument).
watch over
what shall we say, then? is the law sinful? certainly not! nevertheless, i would not have known what sin was had it not been for the law. for i would not have known what coveting really was if the law had not said, “you shall not covet.”
when we are frying something and we put the meat [in the pan], the heat sears [the meat].
and he went back inside the palace. “where do you come from?” he asked jesus, but jesus gave him no answer.
pit
now to him who is able to do immeasurably more than all we ask or imagine, according to his power that is at work within us,
take a day off from regular activities
far above all rule and authority, power and dominion, and every name that is invoked, not only in the present age but also in the one to come.
i always thank my god as i remember you in my prayers,
milk
to shake something out (like salt from a shaker)
wide
those along the path are the ones who hear, and then the devil comes and takes away the word from their hearts, so that they may not believe and be saved.
i like this
[the moon] is coming to its zenith.
just enough left
pour out the corn which you will dry.
once when jesus was praying in private and his disciples were with him, he asked them, “who do the crowds say i am?”
all men will hate you because of me, but he who stands firm to the end will be saved.
to clear field old rice plants, especially rice, to clear field for planting camotes.
then the high priest and all his associates, who were members of the party of the sadducees, were filled with jealousy.
in truthful speech and in the power of god; with weapons of righteousness in the right hand and in the left;
we know that the whole creation has been groaning as in the pains of childbirth right up to the present time.
fork
for if we have been united with him in a death like his, we will certainly also be united with him in a resurrection like his.
to grasp
a person who visited another place, didn’t stay very long then he returned home. if he stayed three days then he returned.
fast
for what i received i passed on to you as of first importance: that christ died for our sins according to the scriptures,
false,
someone asked him, "lord, are only a few people going to be saved?"
animal flea
start eating (because food is ready)
and who through the spirit of holiness was appointed the son of god in power by his resurrection from the dead: jesus christ our lord.
keep watch over yourselves and all the flock of which the holy spirit has made you overseers. be shepherds of the church of god, which he bought with his own blood.
large bead.
to cause disaster
chips, small broken pieces
a kind of rattan.
for he himself is our peace, who has made the two groups one and has destroyed the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility,
if a child gets sick who is always bathing [in the river], the older people say that he afflicted by an evil spirit because he affected by a long-haired spirit [which lives in the water].
someone in the crowd said to him, "teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me."
“teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the law?”
demetrius is well spoken of by everyone--and even by the truth itself. we also speak well of him, and you know that our testimony is true.
if a carabao crosses a large river, it will just be carried by the current.
enter, go into; break out (as in a rash)
in our place, we don't show respect to someone unless they have been made a leader.
a type of cane
then the king told the attendants, ‘tie him hand and foot, and throw him outside, into the darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
deliver weak, ineffective blows
wrap up
kind of hornbill
become unconscious; coma
when he had finished speaking, he said to simon, “put out into deep water, and let down the nets for a catch.”
